
===== PAGE 1/9 =====
Context-Picker: Dynamic Context Selection Using Multi-stage Reinforcement
Learning
Siyuan Zhu1 ,Chengdong Xu 1 ,Kaiqiang Ke 1 andChao Yu 1
1Sun Yat-sen University
{zhusy58, xuchd6, kekq}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
Abstract
In long-context question answering, selecting the
appropriate scope of context for a query remains a
key and unresolved challenge. Insufficient context
can lead to missing essential information, whereas
excessive context often introduces noise and de-
grades answer quality. Conventional methods, such
as retrieving a fixed number of passages or apply-
ing reranking, struggle to dynamically determine
which context to include. This is especially prob-
lematic for factoid questions, which typically de-
pend only on a few precise pieces of evidence.
To overcome this limitation, we propose Context-
Picker, a reasoning-aware framework that reframes
context selection as the task of identifying a min-
imal sufficient evidence subset, moving beyond
conventional similarity-based ranking. Context-
Picker uses a human-inspired two-stage reinforce-
ment learning schedule: stage 1 focuses on improv-
ing the recall rate of critical passages, and stage 2
prioritizes pruning redundancy to distill a compact
evidence set. To resolve reward sparsity, we pro-
pose an offline evidence distillation pipeline that
mines “minimal sufficient sets” via a Leave-One-
Out (LOO) procedure, providing dense and task-
aligned supervision. Experiments on five long-
context and multi-hop QA datasets demonstrate
that our method outperforms strong RAG baselines
and achieved higher answer accuracy. Ablation
studies also indicate that our coarse-to-fine opti-
mization schedule, the redundancy-aware reward
shaping, along with the rationale generated by the
policy, all contribute substantially to these gains.
1 Introduction
In long-context question answering (LCQA) tasks, Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) has become a standard
paradigm for Large Language Models (LLMs) to retrieve
knowledge beyond their parametric knowledge [Lewiset al.,
2021; Guuet al., 2020; Izacardet al., 2022 ]. RAG en-
ables LLMs to access query-related information and miti-
gates hallucination. In practice, most RAG systems adopt
a fixed Top-Kstrategy: a retriever ranks passages based on
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Top K
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Score
Accuracy and Recall vs Top K
Accuracy
Recall
Figure 1: Accuracy versus retrieval depth (Top-K) in a standard
RAG pipeline. Recall increases withK, but answer accuracy does
not improve, which is also reported in recent RAG studies[Jinet al.,
2024].
their semantic similarity with the query, and only the top-
Kpassages with highest similarity scores are concatenated
and fed to the LLMs. Although this method is generally ef-
fective, it still faces the problem of identifying the suitable
Kfor each query. IfKis too small, the model may miss
critical evidence, leading to failure in answering the ques-
tion. IfKis overly large, too many weakly related passages
will result in degrading answer quality through distractors,
attention dilution, and the ”lost-in-the-middle” phenomenon,
where LLMs underutilize information placed in the middle
of long prompts [Liuet al., 2023 ]. As shown in Figure 1,
increasing retrieval depth monotonically improves recall but
often yields diminishing returns for answer accuracy [Jinet
al., 2024 ], which suggests that context handling should be
framed not as ranking, but assubset selection–identifying a
compact, query-specific evidence set sufficient for reasoning.
Recent studies on retrieval-augmented generation address
this problem from two principal approaches. The first line of
work enhances the retrieval pipeline while largely maintain-
ing a fixed context size. Conventional sparse retrievers and
dense dual-encoder models improve the recall using coarse
arXiv:2512.14465v2  [cs.AI]  21 Jan 2026

===== PAGE 2/9 =====
ranking of candidate passages, and are frequently combined
with cross-encoder or sequence-to-sequence rerankers that
further refine the fine-grained ordering of documents[Robert-
sonet al., 2009; Karpukhinet al., 2020; Xionget al., 2020;
Nogueiraet al., 2020 ]. More recent efforts employ LLM-
based rerankers, which leverage query-aware, list-aware, or
generator-aware signals to score and filter contexts [Sunet
al., 2024; Chenet al., 2025; Drozdovet al., 2023; Wanget
al., 2024; Denget al., 2025 ]. While these methods are ef-
fective at elevating highly relevant passages and suppressing
obvious distractors in the ranked list, the generator typically
still processes either a fixed top-K set or manually defined
thresholds; thus, the inherent trade-off between missing per-
tinent evidence and accumulating irrelevant noise still exists.
A complementary line of workadapts how much external
evidence to useon a per-query basis. Adaptive-RAG trains
a lightweight classifier to route each query to different re-
trievaldepths(e.g., no retrieval, single-step retrieval, or itera-
tive retrieval) based on estimated question complexity[Jeong
et al., 2024 ]. In contrast, Adaptive-kselects a query- and
context-specific cutoffKby thresholding the similarity-score
distribution of retrieved candidates, requiring neither addi-
tional fine-tuning nor extra LLM calls [Taguchiet al., 2025 ].
While these approaches avoid using a fixedk, they rely on
either a learnedquery-levelrouter or onnon-learnedscore-
thresholding rules, and they do not explicitly optimize for
identifying a non-redundant evidence subset that preserves
answerability under a fixed input budget.
To move beyond routing and thresholding rules, reinforce-
ment learning (RL) has recently been explored as a way to op-
timize retrieval and selection policies directly from task feed-
back while keeping test-time inference to a single policy for-
ward pass. DynamicRAG models the reranker as an RL agent
over document sequences and uses LLM-judged answer qual-
ity as reward to jointly adjust both the order and the number
of retrieved documents [Sunet al., 2025 ]. Beyond rerank-
ing, recent RL-based systems such as Memory-R1 and related
memory agents frame long-term memory management and
retrieval decisions as RL problems, where a policy is trained
to decide what to store, update, or retrieve in order to support
downstream QA and dialogue [Yanet al., 2025 ]. RL has also
been applied to conversational query reformulation, retrieval
alignment and agentic RAG frameworks that optimize multi-
step retrieval and reasoning trajectories [Zhuet al., 2025;
Xionget al., 2025; Jianget al., 2025 ]. However, many ex-
isting RL-style approaches still rely ontrajectory-leveland
relatively sparse rewards, making it difficult to credit assign-
ment to individual passages and suppress redundant content.
Moreover, they are often optimized for ranking quality, mem-
ory operations, or trajectory success rather than for explicitly
finding the smallest evidence set that maintains answerability
under a strict token budget.
In this paper, we introduceContext-Picker, a reasoning-
aware framework that fundamentally shifts the context selec-
tion paradigm from similarity-based ranking to minimal suffi-
cient subset selection. Instead of treating retrieval as a sorting
problem, Context-Picker formulates it as a decision-making
process, and learns to construct a variable-length evidence
set that is strictly necessary for answering the query. Cen-
tral to our approach is a human-inspired Coarse-to-Fine opti-
mization strategy implemented via a two-stage reinforcement
learning schedule. In Stage I (Recall-Oriented), the picker is
trained to maximize information with a relaxed redundancy
margin, so that all potentially relevant passages—especially
those spanning multiple passages—are captured. In Stage II
(Precision-Oriented), the objective shifts to refinement: the
policy learns to prune redundant or weakly relevant passages,
distilling the context into a compact, noise-free subset with-
out compromising answerability. To alleviate reward spar-
sity and stabilize training, we introduce an offline evidence
distillation pipeline that uses a generator-judge loop with
greedy Leave-One-Out (LOO) pruning to mine minimal suf-
ficient evidence sets from raw documents. These distilled sets
provide dense, task-aligned supervision, enabling the picker
(i.e., policy) to learn to measure the contribution of each evi-
dence piece. Experiments on five long-context and multi-hop
QA datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms strong
RAG baselines and achieved higher answer accuracy.
Contributions.Our main contributions are three-fold: (1)
We proposeContext-Picker, a reasoning-aware context picker
trained with a two-stage reinforcement learning scheme
(Recall-Oriented and Precision-Oriented) to jointly learn
whichandhow manypassages to pick. (2) We introduce an
offline evidence mining pipeline that uses a generator-judge
loop with Leave-One-Out (LOO) pruning to create minimal
sufficient evidence sets for dense supervision. (3) We conduct
extensive experiments on five long-context and multi-hop QA
datasets, demonstrating that Context-Picker improves accu-
racy over strong RAG baselines on four out of five datasets.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Retrieval-Augmented Generation
We follow the standard retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) formulation [Lewiset al., 2021; Guuet al., 2020;
Izacardet al., 2022 ]. LetDdenote a large non-parametric
corpus (e.g., Wikipedia or a long-term memory store). In
long-context QA, each document inDis first segmented
into shorter passages (“chunks”), which serve as the retrieval
units. Given a queryq, the retriever returns the top-Kmost
relevant passages.
C(q) ={c 1, c2, . . . , cN }, N≤K max,(1)
optionally refined by a reranker that reordersC(q)according
to query-specific relevance [Karpukhinet al., 2020; Xionget
al., 2020; Nogueiraet al., 2020 ]. We useC(q), or simplyC
when the query is clear from context, to denote this (re)ranked
candidate pool. Later, when formulating Context-Picker, we
additionally attach a unique identifier to each passagec j and
writeC={(c j,id j)}N
j=1 for convenience.
Context selection.GivenC(q), the system must choose a
variable-lengthsupport setS ⊆ C(q)to feed into the gen-
erator under an input budgetB. We view this as a subset
selection problem that trades off task utility and brevity:
S⋆ ∈arg max
S⊆C(q)

U(q,S)−λ·Len(S)

s.t.Tok(q,S)≤B.
(2)

===== PAGE 3/9 =====
Figure 2: Overview of theContext-Pickerframework. The pipeline consists of two parts: (1)Offline Evidence Mining, where a generator–
judge loop employs a Leave-One-Out (LOO) strategy to mine minimal sufficient evidence sets (S gold) as supervision; (2)Context-Picker
Pipeline, where the picker policy (π θ) learns to select evidence from retrieved candidates (C). The training follows aCoarse-to-Fine
schedule: Stage I optimizes for high recall to capture reasoning chains, while Stage II tightens the redundancy penalty to distill a compact
support set, guided by GRPO updates.
whereU(q,S)is a task utility,Len(S)measures the size of
the support set,λ≥0controls the quality–brevity trade-off,
andTok(q,S)counts input tokens. Context-Picker builds on
this formulation and learns a reasoning-aware policy under a
token budget.
Response generation and utility.Given a support setS,
we construct a promptx= Tpl(q,S)by concatenating in-
structions, the query, and the selected passages, and use a
generatorGto define a conditional distribution over answers:
pθ(y|x) =G(x),from which we decode an answerˆy.
We instantiate the utilityU(q,S)in Eq. (2) either with exact-
match accuracy or with an LLM-as-judge score that evaluates
the semantic correctness ofˆyw.r.t. the reference answer.
2.2 Optimization Objective
We employ Group Relative Policy Optimization
(GRPO) [Shaoet al., 2024 ] to train the picker. Unlike
PPO, GRPO eliminates the critic model by estimating
baselines from group averages. For each queryq, GRPO
samples a group of outputs{ai}G
i=1 from the old policyπθold :
J(θ) =E

 1
G
GX
i=1
min

ri(θ) ˆAi,clip(r i(θ),1−ϵ,1 +ϵ) ˆAi


 −βD KL,(3)
wherer i(θ) =π θ(ai|q)/πθold (ai|q)and the advantage ˆAi is
the normalized reward within the group.
3 Context-Picker
In this section, we introduceContext-Picker, a reinforcement
learning based method for selecting context passages. Fig-
ure 2 provides an overview of the proposed framework. We
start by formulating context picking as a single-step Markov
decision process (MDP) in Section 3.1. Building on this for-
mulation, we detail our overall framework, which comprises
two key components: (i) anoffline evidence miningpipeline
(Section 3.2) that extracts compact yet sufficient evidence
sets from raw documents, and (ii) amulti-stage reinforcement
learningscheme (Section 3.3) that learns a picker policy via a
recall-oriented stage followed by a precision-oriented stage.
Finally, we detail how the learned picker is integrated with
the downstream generator at inference time.
3.1 Problem Formulation
We cast context picking as a single-step decision problem.
Given a queryqand a stage-specific promptp i, the retriever
provides a candidate poolC={(c j,id j)}N
j=1. The observa-
tion iso=⟨p i, q,C⟩. The policy outputs⟨r, a⟩, whereris
a natural-language rationale anda⊆ {idj}is a subset of se-
lected IDs. This maps to the support setS={c j |(c j,id j)∈
C,id j ∈a}. Malformed or out-of-range selections are treated
as invalid and penalized.
Given an offline-mined golden setSgold, the stage-ireward
is defined abstractly as:
Ri(o, a) = Cov(S,Sgold)−Redun i(S,S gold)−γI[¬valid],
(4)
whereCovmeasures coverage,Redun i is a stage-dependent
redundancy penalty, and the last term penalizes format errors.
We instantiate this in Eq. (6).
3.2 Data Curation
Offline evidence mining.To construct high-quality train-
ing data for Context-Picker, we introduce an offline evidence
distillation pipeline. Each documentDis first segmented into

===== PAGE 4/9 =====
semantically coherent chunks via semantic chunking, which
ensures that each chunk forms a locally consistent unit while
preserving contextual continuity. This corresponds to theOf-
fline Evidence Miningmodule on the left side of Figure 2, and
the overall procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
For each query–answer pair(q, a), we perform retrieval
using BM25 on the concatenation of the query and answer,
i.e., on[q;a]over the chunked document. The top-kretrieved
chunks constitute an initial candidate setS cand. We then run
an answer-judge pipeline onS cand: a generatorGproduces
a responseˆaconditioned on(q,S cand), and an LLM-based
judgeJdecides whetherˆasemantically matches the gold
answera. IfJdeemsS cand insufficient (i.e., the answer is
judged as incorrect), we discard this pair, since the retrieved
evidence does not support a correct answer even before prun-
ing.
For the remaining pairs, we greedily prune redundant
chunks via a leave-one-out (LOO) procedure. We initialize
Ssuf ← Scand and iterate over chunksc∈ S suf. For each
c, we temporarily remove it to formS ′ =S suf \ {c}, run
the same answer-judge pipeline on(q,S ′), and obtain a new
judge decision. IfJstill marks the answer as correct, we treat
cas redundant and permanently drop it, updatingS suf ← S′.
We repeat this LOO pruning until no chunk can be removed
without flipping the judge decision from correct to incorrect.
The resulting setS suf is thus a greedily minimal sufficient ev-
idence set with respect to the judge: every remaining chunk is
empirically necessary in the sense that removing any of them
would cause the model to fail the judge. We treatS suf as the
golden evidence supervision for training Context-Picker.
Data augmentation.Considered that most long-context
QA or retrieval datasets contain relatively few unique queries
samples, we introduce lightweight query rewriting to enhance
data diversity. For each original queryq, we generate five
semantically equivalent but lexically diverse reformulations
{q′
i}5
i=1 using a language model. These rewrites preserve the
meaning of the original query while varying in phrasing and
focus, which helps improve linguistic diversity and reduces
overfitting during RL training. During data partitioning, all
rewrites of the same query are assigned to the same subset to
prevent data leakage between training and evaluation data.
This curated dataset, consisting of golden evidence picks
and diverse query formulations, serves as the foundation for
the reinforcement learning phase of Context-Picker.
3.3 Multi-stage Reinforcement Learning
Given the curated training set from Section 3.2, this subsec-
tion describes the two-stage policy optimization component
of Context-Picker, which corresponds to the right part of Fig-
ure 2. We detail the two-stage optimization process below.
In long-context question answering (LCQA), the chal-
lenges ofwhat evidence to pickandhow much evidence
to pickare essentially a coupled combinatorial optimization
problem. As is shown in Figure 2, we decouple this prob-
lem into two training stages:a recall-oriented stagethat em-
phasizes comprehensive evidence coverage, anda refinement-
oriented stagethat focuses on minimal sufficient selection.
Algorithm 1Offline Evidence Mining
Require:DocumentD; queryq; gold answera; retrieverR; en-
coderf emb; generatorG; answer judgeJ; top-k
Ensure:Minimal sufficient setS suf
1:C ←Chunk(D;f emb)// semantic chunking
2:x←[q;a]
3:S cand ←RetrieveTopK(x,C;R, k)// initial evidence pool
4:ˆa← G(q,Scand)
5:r full ← J(q,ˆa, a)
6:ifr full = 0then
7:return∅// if evidence insufficient, drop
8:end if
9:S suf ← Scand // start from full candidate set
10: changed←True
11:whilechangeddo
12: changed←False
13:foreachc∈ S suf do
14:S ′ ← Ssuf \ {c}// leave-one-out
15:ˆa ′ ← G(q,S′)
16:r ′ ← J(q,ˆa′, a)
17:ifr ′ = 1then
18:S suf ← S′ // ifcis redundant, prune
19: changed←True
20:end if
21:end for
22:end while
23:returnS suf
Stage I: Recall-oriented strategy optimization.Stage I is
designed to learn ahigh-recallpicking behavior that prior-
itizesinformation completeness. In our setting, the down-
stream generator can answer a query correctly as long as the
selected context set contains the key evidence that supports
the reasoning chain. We formalize this via the offline-mined
minimal sufficient evidence setSgold (Section 3.2), which ap-
proximates the smallest subset that preserves answerability
under an LLM-based judge.
Stage I thus encourages the policy to maximize
Cov(S,S gold)with arelaxedredundancy tolerancered 1
(Eq. 6), allowing moderate over-selection. This is crucial
for multi-hop QA: missing even a single hop in the evidence
chain can cause a failure, whereas including a few extra pas-
sages is often harmless at this stage. By emphasizing cover-
age and using a loose redundancy margin, Stage I prevents
premature pruning and improves exploration over the combi-
natorial subset space, yielding a robust high-recall initializa-
tion for later compression.
Stage II: Refinement-oriented strategy optimization.
Stage II targetsinput concisenesswhile preserving suffi-
ciency, i.e., converging to aminimal sufficient evidence set.
Starting from the high-recall policy learned in Stage I, we
tighten the redundancy margin tored2 <red 1 and strengthen
the redundancy penalty in the reward (Eq. 6), so the policy is
explicitly discouraged from keeping passages that do not im-
prove answerability. Intuitively, Stage II pushes the picker
toward solving a constrained compression problem:
min
S⊆C(q)
|S|s.t.U(q,S) = 1,(5)
whereU(q,S)is approximated during training by the dis-

===== PAGE 5/9 =====
Figure 3:Training dynamics of Context-Picker using GRPO.The
curves visualize the average reward trajectories on training and vali-
dation sets during (Above) the Recall-Oriented Stage I and (Bottom)
the Precision-Oriented Stage II. Both stages exhibit stable conver-
gence and a narrow gap between training and validation rewards,
indicating that the policy effectively learns to balance evidence cov-
erage and compactness without overfitting.
tilled supervisionS gold and instantiated as coverage-plus-
redundancy shaping in Eq. (6). Operationally, Stage II en-
courages the policy to keep sets that (i) retain near-complete
coverage ofS gold (high recall), yet (ii) eliminate redundant,
repetitive, or weakly relevant passages so as to reduce dis-
tractors and mitigate long-context degradation. As a result,
the learned picker progressively shifts from arecall-sufficient
regime to aprecision-sufficientregime, producing compact
evidence subsets that maximize informativeness under a fixed
token budget.
The reward function is defined as:
Ri(o, a) =



Cov(S,S g)−γ |S| − |Sg|
Li
if valid and|S| ≤Li,
0if valid and|S|> L i,
−1.0if invalid,
(6)
whereS g is the gold evidence set,L i =|S g|+red i is the al-
lowed length with a stage-dependent redundancy margin redi.
The reward logic follows three principles:
• When the output format is valid and the number of se-
lected items does not exceed the “gold standard + re-
dundancy margin,” the reward is determined by recall
rate with a redundancy penalty proportional to oversam-
pling.
• When the selection exceeds the redundancy margin, the
reward is set to zero, discouraging excessive evidence
inclusion.
• When the output format is invalid, a fixed penalty of
−1.0is applied to enforce structural correctness.
Progressive redundancy compression.The key distinc-
tion between the two stages lies in the dynamic compression
of the redundancy margin red. Stage I employs a relaxed mar-
gin red 1 to tolerate redundancy for completeness, whereas
Stage II tightens the threshold to red 2, forcing the policy to
eliminate redundant evidence while maintaining high recall.
This “loose-to-tight” margin adaptation achieves a smooth
optimization fromrecall sufficiencytoinput compactness, en-
abling a Pareto-optimal trade-off between comprehensiveness
and efficiency in LCQA.
Stage transition and schedule.We implement the two
stages as consecutive GRPO phases. We define hyperpa-
rametersT 1 andT 2 to control the number of update steps
for the recall-oriented Stage I and the refinement-oriented
Stage II, respectively. The training is sequential: we first
initialize the policyπ θ and train with the Stage I reward for
T1 steps. We then update the reference policy and continue
training with the Stage II reward forT 2 steps. In practice,
we first train the picker with the Stage I reward (larger redun-
dancy margin red1) until the validation reward curve plateaus,
and then switch to Stage II by continuing training from the
Stage I checkpoint with the tighter margin red 2. We found
that Context-Picker is robust to the exact split betweenT 1
andT 2 as long as Stage I is given enough updates to learn
a high-recall policy; the resulting training dynamics for both
stages are shown in Figure 3.
Inference.At test time, Context-Picker follows a single-
pass retrieve–pick–generate pipeline. Given queryqand
documentD, we generate chunksCand retrieve candidates
Ccand ←TopSim(q,C;B)within budgetB. We then sample
the picker output{r, S} ∼πθ(· | ⟨ptest, q,Ccand⟩), whereSis
the set of selected IDs. Finally, the generator produces answer
ˆa← G(q,Cpick)using evidenceC pick filtered byS, which is
evaluated against the reference via LLM-as-judge (Section 4).
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setup
Datasets.We evaluate Context-Picker on five knowledge-
intensive QA benchmarks that require reasoning over long
or multi-hop contexts: (1)LoCoMo [Maharanaet al.,
2024], which contains extremely long multi-session conver-
sations and tests long-term conversational memory; (2)Mul-
tiFieldQA [Baiet al., 2024 ], a long-context QA dataset
with diverse domains and relatively factoid-style questions;
(3)HotpotQA [Yanget al., 2018 ], a classic multi-hop QA
benchmark over Wikipedia; (4)2WikiMQA [Hoet al.,
2020], a multi-hop QA dataset requiring reasoning across two
Wikipedia articles; and (5)MuSiQue [Trivediet al., 2022 ],
which decomposes multi-hop questions into compositional
single-hop subquestions. For datasets in LongBench [Baiet
al., 2024] that do not come with ground-truth evidence pas-
sages or IDs, we apply the offline evidence mining proce-
dure in Algorithm 1 to construct training supervision. Con-
cretely, we first perform semantic chunking over each long
document usingtext-embedding-ada-002with a sim-
ilarity threshold of0.75, and then mine sufficient and golden
evidence sets for each(q, a)pair.
Baselines.We compare Context-Picker against three cat-
egories of methods: (1)Standard Baselines:Standard

===== PAGE 6/9 =====
Method Setting LoCoMo MultiFieldQA HotpotQA 2WikiMQA MuSiQue
Standard Baselines
Standard RAG
TopK=5 – 0.857 0.597 0.525 0.340
TopK=10 – 0.857 0.700 0.560 0.390
TopK=100 0.622 – – – –
Advanced Baselines
Adaptive-k Dynamick– 0.855 0.708 0.575 0.405
RankRAG TopK=10 0.6550.8750.732 0.665 0.465
DynamicRAG RL-Agent 0.675 0.860 0.740 0.685 0.505
Memory-R1 RL-Agent 0.695 – – – –
Ours (Context-Picker)
Context-Picker (Stage 1) Recall-Oriented 0.681 0.873 0.741 0.621 0.476
Context-Picker (Stage 2) Precision-Oriented0.7060.8250.747 0.702 0.522
Table 1:Main results on knowledge-intensive QA benchmarks.Reported metrics are LLM-as-a-judge Accuracy (Qwen3-32B). Best
results are inbold.
Method Judge Acc (%)∆vs. full
Context-Picker (full) 70.6 –
w/o rationale 64.1 -6.5
w/o redundancy 66.0 -4.6
w/o Stage 1 56.5 -14.1
Table 2:Ablation study of Context-Picker onLoCoMo.∆de-
notes absolute drops in Judge Acc (percentage points) compared to
the full setting.
RAGretrieving Top-K(K∈ {5,10,100}) chunks. (2)
Heuristic/Reranking Methods:Adaptive-k [Taguchiet al.,
2025], which dynamically selectskvia score thresholding,
andRankRAG [Yuet al., 2024 ] leverages an LLM-based
ranker to rerank retrieved passages and select the top-k con-
texts for generation, thereby improving context ordering. (3)
RL-based Agents:DynamicRAG [Sunet al., 2025 ], which
models the reranker as an RL agent to dynamically adjust
the order and number of retrieved documents, andMemory-
R1 [Yanet al., 2025 ], which uses RL to learn memory man-
agement operations (ADD/UPDATE/DELETE/NOOP).
Evaluation protocol.Traditional metrics such as exact
match (EM) and F1 are known to be brittle for free-form an-
swers. For example, the answers “The cat is on the mat.” and
“A cat rests on a mat.” convey essentially the same meaning
but would receive a low EM/F1 score due to lexical differ-
ences, whereas “The cat is on the mat.” and “The dog is on
the mat.” share substantial n-gram overlap while being fac-
tually incompatible. Following recent work on LLM-based
evaluation [Guet al., 2025 ], we thus adopt anLLM-as-judge
protocol as our primary metric. Given a questionq(gener-
ated by GPT-4o mini), a reference answera⋆, and a predicted
answerˆa, a judge model returns a binary correctness label:
Judgeans(q, a⋆,ˆa)∈ {0,1},based on a rubric that checks se-
mantic equivalence toa⋆ and penalizes hallucinations or con-
tradictions. We report the fraction of examples for which the
judge predicts correctness, referred to asJudge Acc.
4.2 Main Results
Table 1 summarizes the main results across the five bench-
marks.
Performance comparison.Table 1 presents the compara-
tive results. Context-Picker (Stage 2) achieves the best per-
formance on four out of five benchmarks, outperforming
both standard RAG and advanced baselines. Specifically, on
reasoning-heavy datasets likeMuSiQueandHotpotQA, our
method surpasses the strong reranking baseline RankRAG by
margins of+5.7%and+1.5%, respectively. This highlights
that for multi-hop questions, simply reordering documents
(RankRAG) is insufficient; explicitly pruning distractors to
form a minimal evidence set is crucial for accurate reasoning.
Compared to RL-based peers (DynamicRAG, Memory-R1),
Context-Picker also demonstrates superior accuracy, particu-
larly on the ultra-longLoCoMobenchmark.
Recall vs. Precision Trade-off.OnMultiFieldQA,
RankRAG achieves the top score, slightly outperforming our
Precision-Oriented Stage II. We attribute this to the dataset’s
needle-in-a-haystacknature: many questions are closer to
extractive factoid QA, where answerablity is dominated by
whether a small number of critical snippets are retrieved, and
the benefit of redundancy suppression is comparatively lim-
ited. Our Recall-Oriented Stage I reaches0.873, statistically
tied with RankRAG, indicating that the coarse stage effec-
tively maximizes evidence coverage. In contrast, Stage II
enforces a tighter redundancy margin and explicitly opti-
mizes evidence compression; while this is advantageous on
reasoning-heavy benchmarks by removing distractors (e.g.,
MuSiQue), it can occasionally prune borderline but helpful
cues, leading to a slight drop on MultiFieldQA. Overall, the
two-stage design provides a practical controllable trade-off:
Stage I prioritizes recall, while Stage II prioritizes compact-
ness and reasoning density.
Effect of the two-stage schedule.The two-stage training
scheme yields a clear pattern. Stage I, which uses a relaxed
redundancy margin and emphasizes high recall, is particu-

===== PAGE 7/9 =====
larly helpful on datasets where evidence is dispersed or con-
versations are long. Stage II, which tightens the redundancy
penalty to favor minimal sufficient sets, further improves ac-
curacy on four out of five benchmarks while also shortening
the selected contexts. This supports our hypothesis that grad-
ually shifting the objective from recall to precision leads to
a better quality–efficiency trade-off than optimizing a single-
stage objective.
Training stability.Reinforcement learning on discrete text
selection is often characterized by instability. However,
thanks to our dense reward supervision mined via LOO
and the GRPO algorithm, Context-Picker demonstrates ro-
bust training dynamics. As illustrated in Figure 3, the re-
ward curves for both the Recall-Oriented Stage I (Above)
and Precision-Oriented Stage II (Bottom) show steady con-
vergence. The minimal gap between training and validation
performance further validates the generalization capability of
our offline evidence mining strategy.
4.3 Ablation Studies
To better understand which components of Context-Picker
drive the gains, we conduct ablations on theLoCoModataset.
We focus on three aspects: rationale generation, redundancy-
aware reward shaping, and the recall-oriented Stage I.
Rationale generation.In the full model, the picker outputs
both a short natural-language rationale and a set of selected
IDs. Removing the rationale branch (“w/o rationale”) leads
to a6.5-point drop in Judge Acc. We hypothesize that requir-
ing the model to verbalize why certain passages are selected
acts as a structural regularizer: it encourages more stable rea-
soning over evidence interactions and reduces the tendency to
over-select loosely related passages.
Redundancy-aware reward shaping.When we remove
the redundancy term in the reward (“w/o redundancy”), the
picker no longer receives explicit penalties for overshooting
the golden set size. Under the same token budget, this variant
tends to keep more passages and accumulates noise, resulting
in a4.6-point drop on LoCoMo. This confirms that explicitly
modeling length/redundancy in the reward is important for
achieving a good balance between recall and precision, rather
than relying solely on an implicit budget constraint.
Role of the recall-oriented Stage I.Finally, we exam-
ine a variant trained only with the Stage II objective (“w/o
Stage 1”), i.e., directly optimizing the refinement-oriented re-
ward from scratch. This leads to a substantial degradation
to56.5%Judge Acc,14.1points below the full two-stage
Context-Picker. Although the “w/o Stage 1” variant opti-
mizes the same final reward function, it suffers from the cold-
start problem inherent in combinatorial optimization. The
Stage 2 reward imposes a strict penalty on redundancy. With-
out the high-recall initialization provided by Stage 1, the
agent faces a sparse reward landscape: exploring larger sub-
sets incurs immediate length penalties, while small random
subsets rarely contain the complete evidence chain required
for reasoning. Consequently, the policy gets trapped in a lo-
cal optimum of selecting overly sparse contexts to minimize
penalties, failing to answer the question.
These ablation studies show that our coarse-to-fine op-
timization schedule, the redundancy-aware reward shaping,
along with the rationale generated by the policy, all contribute
to our method.
5 Related Work
Adaptive RAG.While standard RAG retrieves a fixed top-
Kpassages [Lewiset al., 2021 ], recent works attempt to
adapt context dynamically. Approaches like Self-RAG [Asai
et al., 2023 ] and FLARE [Jianget al., 2023 ] interleave
retrieval with generation, but incur high inference latency.
Adaptive-RAG [Jeonget al., 2024 ] and Adaptive-k [Taguchi
et al., 2025 ] select retrieval depth via classifiers or score
thresholds, yet they rely on heuristics rather than optimizing
for evidence sufficiency. Unlike rerankers that score passages
individually [Sunet al., 2024; Wanget al., 2024 ], Context-
Picker optimizes theevidence subsetdirectly.
RL for Retrieval.RL has been applied to query reformu-
lation [Zhuet al., 2025 ] and retriever alignment [Sunet al.,
2025]. However, methods like DynamicRAG typically op-
timize for ranking quality or answer correctness via sparse,
trajectory-level rewards. Recent memory-agents [Yanet al.,
2025; Maharanaet al., 2024 ] use RL for long-term mem-
ory management but often lack mechanisms to penalize re-
dundancy explicitly. Our framework differs by using offline-
mined “minimal sufficient sets” to provide dense supervision,
enabling the policy to learn precise evidence compression.
6 Conclusion
We introducedContext-Picker, a reinforcement learning
framework that shifts context retrieval from static ranking
to dynamic, minimal sufficient subset selection. By lever-
aging offline-mined supervision and a two-stage coarse-to-
fine training schedule, our model learns to balance high re-
call with strict compactness. Experiments across five bench-
marks demonstrate that Context-Picker outperforms strong
RAG baselines in answer accuracy. Future work will extend
this paradigm to open-ended generation tasks and investigate
integration with token-level compression techniques to fur-
ther optimize inference costs.
References
[Asaiet al., 2023 ] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang,
Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning
to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,
2023.
[Baiet al., 2024 ] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang,
Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao
Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie
Tang, and Juanzi Li. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask
benchmark for long context understanding, 2024.
[Chenet al., 2025 ] Haotian Chen, Qingqing Long, Meng
Xiao, Xiao Luo, Wei Ju, Chengrui Wang, Xuezhi
Wang, Yuanchun Zhou, and Hengshu Zhu. Scir-
erankbench: Benchmarking rerankers towards scientific
retrieval-augmented generated llms, 2025.

===== PAGE 8/9 =====
[Denget al., 2025 ] Jiale Deng, Yanyan Shen, Ziyuan Pei,
Youmin Chen, and Linpeng Huang. Influence guided con-
text selection for effective retrieval-augmented generation,
2025.
[Drozdovet al., 2023 ] Andrew Drozdov, Honglei Zhuang,
Zhuyun Dai, Zhen Qin, Razieh Rahimi, Xuanhui Wang,
Dana Alon, Mohit Iyyer, Andrew McCallum, Donald Met-
zler, and Kai Hui. Parade: Passage ranking using demon-
strations with large language models, 2023.
[Guet al., 2025 ] Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hex-
iang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan
Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun
Zhang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni, and Jian
Guo. A survey on llm-as-a-judge, 2025.
[Guuet al., 2020 ] Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung,
Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm:
Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training, 2020.
[Hoet al., 2020 ] Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku
Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-
hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning
steps, 2020.
[Izacardet al., 2022 ] Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria
Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick,
Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and
Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval
augmented language models, 2022.
[Jeonget al., 2024 ] Soyeong Jeong, Jinheon Baek, Sukmin
Cho, Sung Ju Hwang, and Jong C. Park. Adaptive-
rag: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language
models through question complexity, 2024.
[Jianget al., 2023 ] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Luyu Gao,
Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval aug-
mented generation, 2023.
[Jianget al., 2025 ] Wentao Jiang, Xiang Feng, Zengmao
Wang, Yong Luo, Pingbo Xu, Zhe Chen, Bo Du, and Jing
Zhang. Rex-rag: Reasoning exploration with policy cor-
rection in retrieval-augmented generation, 2025.
[Jinet al., 2024 ] Bowen Jin, Jinsung Yoon, Jiawei Han, and
Sercan O. Arik. Long-context llms meet rag: Overcoming
challenges for long inputs in rag, 2024.
[Karpukhinet al., 2020 ] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz,
Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov,
Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval
for open-domain question answering. In Bonnie Webber,
Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu, editors,Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 6769–6781,
Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Lewiset al., 2021 ] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksan-
dra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
Goyal, Heinrich K ¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih,
Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
nlp tasks, 2021.
[Liuet al., 2023 ] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt,
Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language mod-
els use long contexts, 2023.
[Maharanaet al., 2024 ] Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee,
Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and
Yuwei Fang. Evaluating very long-term conversational
memory of llm agents, 2024.
[Nogueiraet al., 2020 ] Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang,
and Jimmy Lin. Document ranking with a pretrained
sequence-to-sequence model, 2020.
[Robertsonet al., 2009 ] Robertson, Stephen, and Hugo
Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25
and beyond.Foundations and Trends in Information Re-
trieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.
[Shaoet al., 2024 ] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu,
Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Y . K. Li, Y . Wu, and Daya Guo.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical rea-
soning in open language models, 2024.
[Sunet al., 2024 ] Weiwei Sun, Lingyong Yan, Xinyu Ma,
Shuaiqiang Wang, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Dawei Yin,
and Zhaochun Ren. Is chatgpt good at search? investigat-
ing large language models as re-ranking agents, 2024.
[Sunet al., 2025 ] Jiashuo Sun, Xianrui Zhong, Sizhe Zhou,
and Jiawei Han. Dynamicrag: Leveraging outputs of
large language model as feedback for dynamic reranking
in retrieval-augmented generation, 2025.
[Taguchiet al., 2025 ] Chihiro Taguchi, Seiji Maekawa, and
Nikita Bhutani. Efficient context selection for long-context
qa: No tuning, no iteration, just adaptive-k, 2025.
[Trivediet al., 2022 ] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubrama-
nian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Musique:
Multihop questions via single-hop question composition,
2022.
[Wanget al., 2024 ] Liang Wang, Nan Yang, and Furu Wei.
Learning to retrieve in-context examples for large lan-
guage models, 2024.
[Xionget al., 2020 ] Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li,
Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul Bennett, Junaid Ahmed,
and Arnold Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor neg-
ative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval, 2020.
[Xionget al., 2025 ] Guangzhi Xiong, Qiao Jin, Xiao Wang,
Yin Fang, Haolin Liu, Yifan Yang, Fangyuan Chen, Zhix-
ing Song, Dengyu Wang, Minjia Zhang, Zhiyong Lu, and
Aidong Zhang. Rag-gym: Systematic optimization of lan-
guage agents for retrieval-augmented generation, 2025.
[Yanet al., 2025 ] Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao
Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen
Ma, Kristian Kersting, Jeff Z. Pan, Hinrich Sch¨utze, V olker
Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Memory-r1: Enhancing large lan-
guage model agents to manage and utilize memories via
reinforcement learning, 2025.
[Yanget al., 2018 ] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang,
Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,