
===== PAGE 1/24 =====
January, 2025
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for
retrieval-augmented generation
Nadezhda Chirkova Thibault Formal Vassilina Nikoulina Stéphane Clinchant
NAVER LABS Europe, Grenoble, France
https://huggingface.co/naver/provence-reranker-debertav3-v1
Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation improves various aspects of large language models (LLMs) generation,
but suffers from computational overhead caused by long contexts as well as the propagation of irrelevant
retrieved information into generated responses. Context pruning deals with both aspects, by removing
irrelevant parts of retrieved contexts before LLM generation. Existing context pruning approaches
are however limited, and do not provide a universal model that would be bothefficient and robust in
a wide range of scenarios, e.g., when contexts contain a variable amount of relevant information or
vary in length, or when evaluated on various domains. In this work, we close this gap and introduce
Provence (Pruning and Reranking Of retrieVEd relevaNt ContExts), an efficient and robust context
pruner for Question Answering, which dynamically detects the needed amount of pruning for a given
context and can be used out-of-the-box for various domains. The three key ingredients ofProvence
are formulating the context pruning task as sequence labeling, unifying context pruning capabilities
with context reranking, and training on diverse data. Our experimental results show thatProvence
enables context pruning with negligible to no drop in performance, in various domains and settings,
at almost no cost in a standard RAG pipeline. We also conduct a deeper analysis alongside various
ablations to provide insights into training context pruners for future work.
1. Introduction
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become
a widely-used paradigm for improving factuality, at-
tribution, and adaptability of Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Das et al., 2019; Asai et al., 2024; Seo et al.,
2019; Lewis et al., 2020; Mallen et al., 2023a; Min
et al., 2023). Augmenting a given user’s query with re-
trieved relevant contexts helps to avoid the generation
of untruthful information and enables the provision of
references used to generate the answer. Furthermore,
using a domain-specific datastore may enable access
and reasoning over a previously unknown knowledge
– without fine-tuning the LLM. One additional advan-
tage of the RAG approach is the easy plug-and-play
architecture (LangChain): practitioners may choose
components (retrievers, generator LLMs, context gran-
ularity etc.) which best suit their particular cases to
maximize the final performance.
Corresponding author(s): nadia.chirkova@naverlabs.com, thibault.formal@naverlabs.com
arXiv:2501.16214v1  [cs.CL]  27 Jan 2025

===== PAGE 2/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
Train 
question
Datastore
How many 
French words 
are there in 
English?
input input target
Question: How many French words are there 
in English? 
Context: [1] Inﬂuence of French on English. [2] 
The most notable inﬂuence of French has … 
Answer the Question, using only information 
provided in the Context. If no useful 
information is provided, you must output "No 
answer". If some parts of the Context are 
used to answer, you must cite all the 
corresponding sentences using symbols [ ].
Retriever
Context 
pruner & 
reranker User 
question
Data 
How 
much 
did 
Elon 
Musk 
buy 
Twitter 
for?
Elon Musk bought Twitter for $44 billion.
Generated response
How many … Inﬂu  ence of …  The most…
0 0 1 1 1 0 0
prompt
architecture
Inference Training
Provence Training 
Provence Provence
Musk's acquisition of the social 
media company has been mired in 
controversy. <…> On Oct. 28, he 
ﬁnally did. Tesla CEO Elon Musk 
completed the deal to acquire 
Twitter at his original oﬀer price of 
$54.20 a share. The total cost is 
roughly $44 billion. In the ensuing 
days, Musk ﬁred top executives<…>
Tesla CEO Elon Musk completed the 
deal to acquire Twitter at his original 
oﬀer price of $54.20 a share. The 
total cost is roughly $44 billion.
store
Generator 
LLM
Retriever  + 
reranker
Data labeler 
LLM
Retrieved 
context
Pruned 
context
Rerank 
score
target
[BOS]
0.9
Rerank score Binary mask
Retrieved passages
Reranked and pruned passages
Figure 1: Illustration of inference (left) and training (right) ofProvence.
Table 1: Analysis of existing approaches for context pruning. Violet / Orange highlight practical / less-practical
solutions.
Approach Query-
dep.
Granularity Output Type Base arch. Multi-
domain
testing
Model re-
lease
Selective Context No token-level % of tokens extr. Llama-7B / GPT2 Yes Yes
LLMLingua No token-level % of tokens extr. Alpaca-7B / GPT2 Yes Yes
LongLLMLingua Yes token-level % of tokens extr. Llama-2-7B-chat Yes Yes
LLMLingua2 No token-level % of tokens extr. RoBERTa / mBERT Yes Yes
RECOMP extr. Yes sent.-level 𝑘sentences extr. BERT No Yes
RECOMP abstr. Yes sent.-level ⩾ 0 sentences abstr. T5-L No Yes
FilCo Yes sent.-level 1 sentence abstr. T5-XL / Llama-2-7B No No
COMPACT Yes sent.-level ⩾ 0 sentences abstr. Mistral-7B No Yes
Provence (ours) Yes sent.-level ⩾ 0 sentences extr. DeBERTa Yes Yes
At the same time, the use of RAG addscomputational
overheaddue to both retrieval latency and the increased
input length for the LLMs. It may also propagateir-
relevant informationpresent in retrieved contexts into
generated responses. These issues can be solved by
developing more efficient and robust LLMs – either by
making architectural changes to process long contexts
moreefficiently(Nawrotetal.,2024;Dao,2024;Cheva-
lier et al., 2023; Louis et al., 2025) or increasing the
diversity of the tuning data to improve processing of
irrelevant contexts (Lin et al., 2024). However, tuning
the LLM can be highly resource-consuming, or even
impossible to apply for proprietary (closed) LLMs. An
alternativesolutionconsistsin pruningretrievedcontexts
by removing context parts irrelevant to the user’s query
– which reduces context lengths and therefore speeds
up generation. Such context pruning module can be
used in aplug-and-play manner with any generator LLM,
featuring both easy use and better transparency in the
RAG pipeline.
Despite initial efforts on developing context pruners for
RAG, none of the existing solutions provide a model
ready to be usedout-of-the-boxin practice. First, many
approaches are designed for a simplified setting, e.g.,
with the assumption that only one sentence per con-
text is relevant to the input query (Wang et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2024), or that the compression ratio is fixed
(Jiang et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2024). However, in prac-
tice contexts may containvarious portions of relevant
information, from empty to full relevant context, and
pruners should detect it in anadaptablefashion. Sec-
ond, many works introduce context pruners that are not
efficient enough to be used in practice. This includes
using billion-sized LLMs as base models for pruners
(Jiang et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023),
or designing abstractive context compressors which re-
quire sequential autoregressive generation of the final
context (Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). We argue
that a more practical andefficient setting consists in
fine-tuning a small-size model such as DeBERTa (He
et al., 2021b,a), as anextractive pruner, i.e., with a
lightweight prediction head for selecting relevant con-
text parts. Third, most of the existing works train con-
text pruners for each dataset individually and do not
target nor test prunersrobustnessto various data do-
mains.
Table 1 summarizes the properties of various existing
methods along specified dimensions and shows that
none of them satisfy all listed criteria. The table also
includes a dimension of pruning granularity, i.e., token-
level vs sentence-level pruning. In this work, we focus
onquery-dependentsentence-level pruning,whichprunes
2

===== PAGE 3/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
out semantic units (sentences) that are deemed not rel-
evant to generate the answer. An alternative approach
is token-level pruning which prunes out low-level gram-
matical units such as articles or interjections, usually in
a query-independent fashion. The two approaches are
orthogonal and could potentially be combined.
To address listed limitations, we introduceProvence
(Pruning and Reranking Of retrieVEd relevaNt Con-
tExt), an approach for training anadaptable, efficient
and robust sentence-level context pruner for Question
Answering, which can be usedout-of-the-box across
various domains and settings. To achieve this, we for-
mulate context pruning asbinary sequence labelingso
that the binary mask predicted by the pruner deter-
mines sentences (from zero to all) which are relevant to
the query, and train our pruner from a lightweight De-
BERTa model on diverse data. Furthermore, we notice
that context pruning and reranking (i.e., the second
step in effective retrieval pipelines) bear a strong re-
semblance. We therefore propose tounify these two
models into a single one, completelyeliminating the
cost of context pruning in the RAG pipeline.
More specifically, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose an approach for training anadaptable,
robust, andefficient context pruner for QA – and
release our trained model. Three key ingredients
of our approach are formulating context pruning
as sequence labeling, unifying context pruning and
rerankinginasinglemodel,andtrainingondiverse
data.
• We test Provence on various QA domains and
show itsout-of-the-box applicabilityto prune con-
textswithnegligibletonodropinperformanceand
atalmostnocost, substantiallyoutperformingbase-
line approaches. We also demonstrateProvence
capabilities in detecting the number of relevant
sentences at any positions in the context and ro-
bustness to various context lengths.
• We conduct multiple ablations to demonstrate
which techniques are essential for training robust
context pruners, to provide insights for future con-
text pruners development.
Definitions. A typical RAG pipeline consists of(0) a
user’s question, or query;(1) a datastore, i.e., a col-
lection ofdocuments (pieces of text) to be retrieved
from, (2) an efficient retriever which enables fast re-
trieval from a large datastore (typically a dual-encoder
model, where queries and passages are encoded in-
dependently), (3) a more expensive cross-encoder
reranker which further reduces and reorders a set of re-
trieved passages (cross-encoding means encoding a pas-
sage together with a query); and(4) a generator LLM
which outputs the final response based on the user’s
queryandtherelevantpassages. Suchapipelinecanbe
represented asretrieve >> rerank >> generate.
Context pruning can be incorporated before generation,
i.e., retrieve >> rerank >> prune >> generate.
In our work, we also propose to incorporate context
pruningintoreranking,anessentialandalreadypresent
component in RAG (Rau et al., 2024a):retrieve >>
rerank+prune >> generate. This enablescontext
pruning at almost zero cost.
2. Related work
Context pruning.RECOMP (Xu et al., 2024) focuses
on context pruning for RAG and proposes both extrac-
tive and abstractive context pruners. The extractive
RECOMP approach independently encodes sentences
in the context and then selects top sentences with em-
beddings closest to the query embedding. Such an
approach limits context understanding, due to inde-
pendent processing of both sentences and queries. The
method also requires specifying the amount of sen-
tences to keep as a hyperparameter – which is usually
unknown in practice and should depend on each par-
ticular passage. The abstractive RECOMP summarizes
key information from the passage relevant to the query
(including zero relevant information) by training on
silver summaries generated by GPT-3.5. However, it
requires inefficient autoregressive generation of the fi-
nal context, and can eventually hallucinate facts not
present in the input context. FilCo (Wang et al., 2023)
similarlyproposestogeneratecontextsautoregressively
but is trained on extractive targets, i.e., one sentence
from the context selected by one of three criteria. The
drawbacks are again inefficiency and the simplified as-
sumption of one relevant sentence per context. A recent
approach, COMPACT (Yoon et al., 2024), also proposes
to generate filtered contexts autoregressively – hence
inefficiently – and introduces an iterative approach for
gradually updating the relevant context after process-
ing a new portion of retrieved passages. In contrast
to all listed efforts,Provence dynamically detects the
amount of relevant information in the context – from
zero to all sentences – in an extractive and efficient
way. Furthermore, we propose a novel approach of
integrating context pruning into a reranker.
Concurrently to our work, DSLR (Hwang et al., 2024)
performs extractive sentence-level pruning, by encod-
ing sentences one-by-one, together with the query, us-
ing existing rerankers. Similarly toProvence, DSLR
keeps sentences with scores higher than a threshold
and preserves the original order of sentences. However,
3

===== PAGE 4/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
in contrast to Provence,DSLR is not capable of keep-
ing groups of semantically connected sentences, due to
independent sentence processing.
An orthogonal line of work proposes extractive token-
levelpruners. LLMLingua(Jiangetal.,2023)andSelec-
tive Context (Li et al., 2023) use LLMs to remove tokens
withhighgenerationprobabilities, independentlyofthe
query. LLMLingua2 (Pan et al., 2024) is a small BERT-
based model finetuned to eliminate redundant tokens,
alsoindependentlyofthequery. LongLLMLingua(Jiang
et al., 2024) proposes query-dependent LLM-based to-
ken pruning based on contrastive perplexity. Listed
approaches remove tokens in a way that it does not
break context understanding for the LLM – hence they
are not capable of removing semantic parts of the con-
text. LLMLingua models also have many hyperparame-
ters in the interface which are hard to tune in practice.
These approaches can however also be combined with
sentence-level pruning.
Retrieval granularity.Alternatively to context pruning,
onecanreformulatedatastorecontentintoatomicunits,
e.g., propositions as in Dense-X retrieval Chen et al.
(2024c)or decontextualizedsentences (Choietal.,2021).
Such preprocessing is expensive and can lead to some
information loss.
Passage filtering.Another related – and orthogonal
– line of works focuses on filtering entire passages if
they are deemed irrelevant for a given question; such
an approach can be straightforwardly combined with
Provence. A simple method consists in introducing a
threshold on the (re)ranking score. LongLLMLingua
reranks passages based on the probability of a question
given the passage. (Yoran et al., 2024) use natural
language inference models to filter out passages that
do not entail question-answer pairs, but report that this
approach sometimes filters out relevant passages too.
ImprovingcontextprocessinginLLMs. Whilecontext
pruners aim to remove context parts irrelevant to the
user’s query, another line of work aims to process con-
texts more efficiently and effectively in LLMs. Efficient
context processing could be achieved through efficient
attention implementations (Dao, 2024; Anagnostidis
et al., 2023), KV cache compression (Nawrot et al.,
2024), encoding retrieved passages in parallel (Zhu
et al., 2024), or compressing contexts into one or more
context embeddings (Chevalier et al., 2023; Ge et al.,
2024; Rau et al., 2024b; Louis et al., 2025). Other
worksaimtomakeLLMsmorerobust, byexposingthem
to noisy contexts during training or finetuning (Izac-
ard et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024). All such approaches
usually require LLM adaptation which may complicate
application to an arbitrary picked LLM.
3. Provence
The high-level overview of our proposed approach is
illustrated in Figure 1. Our first contribution is to pose
thecontextpruningproblemasasequencelabelingtask.
We fine-tune a DeBERTa model to encode the query–
context pair and output binary masks which are used to
filter out irrelevant context parts. The labels for train-
ing are generated by LLama-3-8B-Instruct (AI@Meta,
2024); we call themsilver labels since they are gen-
erated automatically. Such an approach solves sev-
eral limitations of existing context pruners: (1) by
construction, the model is able to deal with varying
noise in contexts and select an appropriate pruning
ratio; (2) queries are encoded together with context
sentences (cross-encoding), providing richer represen-
tations – compared for instance to extractive RECOMP
which encodes query and context sentences indepen-
dently; (3) using a lightweight encoder makes our ap-
proach more efficient than LLM-based or abstractive
methods.
Our second contribution consists in unifying reranking
andcontextpruning–insteadofconsideringthesesteps
asdistinctintheRAGpipeline. In Provence, reranking
and pruning can be donein a single forward step, thus
eliminating the computational overhead due to context
pruning – makingProvence almost “free”.
Training data.Our approach requires a set of training
questions and a retrieval datastore. Speficially, we rely
on the train set of the MS MARCO document ranking
collection which includes 370𝑘 queries (Nguyen et al.,
2016). The MS MARCO collection is a domain-diverse
datastore of3.2𝑀 documents crawled from the Web
– which is required for the final model’s robustness to
various domains – and is often used to train retrievers
and rerankers. We also consider the train set of Natu-
ral Questions which contains 87𝑘 queries Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019).
Data processing. We create a retrieval datastore by
splitting MS MARCO documents into passages consist-
ing of𝑁 consecutive sentences –𝑁 being a random in-
teger ∈1..10. This is to enable the pruner’s robustness
to variable retrieved context lengths. We also prepend
page titles to each passage. For each question, we re-
trieve top-5 relevant passages using a strong retrieval
pipeline (Rau et al., 2024a) consisting of a SPLADE-
v3 retriever (Lassance et al., 2024) and a DeBERTa-v3
reranker (Lassance & Clinchant, 2023). The result-
ing set of retrieved passages is naturally diverse w.r.t.
relevance or irrelevance to the question, due to imper-
fections in retrieval.
4

===== PAGE 5/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
Silver labels generation.Given a question and a re-
trieved passage (context), we split the passage into
sentences1 and prompt Llama-3-8B-Instruct to select
sentences relevant to the given question. One approach
would be to use a straightforward prompt such as“Out-
put indexes of sentences relevant to the given question”.
However,wedecidedtoutilizethestrongLLMs’capabili-
ties of actuallyansweringquestions whilecitingrelevant
context sentences. We therefore instruct the LLM to
answer the given question usingonly information pro-
vided in the given context, and output“No answer”in
case no relevant information is provided. We also spec-
ify the easy-to-parse citation format[i] and number
sentences with the same marker in the context. Our
prompt can be found in Appendix – Table 6; we use
greedy decoding and parse cited sentences using regu-
lar expressions. We also compare different prompting
strategies in the ablation study.
We found that Llama-3-8B is well capable of answer-
ing only based on a given context in most cases and of
outputting a citation∼90% of the time. We filter out
cases when no citations are produced and"No answer"
is not present in the LLM’s output, as these are the cases
when the context actually contains relevant informa-
tion but the LLM “forgot” to cite it. The final labels
distribution (number of selected sentences per context,
their positions) is shown in Appendix – Figure 5.
Training of Provence.Our context pruner receives as
input the concatenation of a question and a retrieved
context, and outputsper-token binary labelsdenoting
whether each token (defined by the pretrained model’s
tokenizer) should be included in the selected context.
InSection4.4(Ablations), wealsoconsideranapproach
where a special token is inserted at the beginning of
each sentence, and labels are predicted per-sentence
based on the representations of those tokens. We train
Provence as a binary per-token classifier with ground
truth labels coming from the silver data labeling, and
the model can be used as a standalone pruner, i.e.,
retrieve >>rerank >>Provence (standalone)
>> generate.
Unifying compression and reranking. We note
that cross-encoder rerankers (Nogueira & Cho, 2020)
share both the same architecture and inputs (pairs of
question–passages)as Provence. Additionally, thetask
of context pruning (selecting parts of contexts that are
useful for generating the answer to the question) in-
trinsically bears similarity with re-ranking (estimating
the relevance of a context w.r.t. the question) – and we
hypothesize the possibility of knowledge transfer be-
1using the nltk.sent_tokenize function: https://www.
nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.sent_tokenize.html
tween these two related tasks. We therefore propose to
unify both approaches in a single model, with two dif-
ferent task heads. More specifically, the reranking head
outputs a scalar prediction for theBOS token while the
pruning head outputs per-token predictions for the pas-
sage tokens, as illustrated in Figure 1. To ease training,
we propose to further fine-tune a pretrained reranker
on our labeling objective, while adding a ranking “reg-
ularizer” to preserve initial reranking capabilities. The
regularizer is a Mean Squared Error loss on the rerank-
ing scores from the initial reranker. This can be viewed
as a straightforward pointwise score distillation pro-
cess, where the initial model serves as the teacher – a
method that has demonstrated great effectiveness in
Information Retrieval Hofstätter et al. (2021). The final
loss function is as follows:
L=
𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1
 𝐿𝑛∑︁
𝑘=1
log 𝑃(𝑦𝑛,𝑘|𝑧𝑛,𝑘)+ 𝜆
 
𝑠𝑛 −𝑧𝑛,0
2

𝑧𝑛 = Provence(𝑥𝑛)
(1)
where 𝑁 is the number of datapoints (query–passage
pairs), 𝑥𝑛 is a sequence of𝐿𝑛 +1 input tokens (concate-
nated query, passage andBOS at the 0-𝑡ℎposition), 𝑧𝑛 is
a sequence of𝐿𝑛+1 predictions output by the model,𝑦𝑛
is a sequence of𝐿𝑛 target binary labels for context prun-
ing, 𝑠𝑛 is the teacher score (initial reranker),𝑧𝑛,0 is the
ranking score predicted from theBOS representation.
In the case of the unified model, re-ranking and context
pruning need a single forward step from the encoder,
i.e., retrieve >>Provence (w/ re-ranking) >>
generate – making context pruning almost free in
terms of execution time.
Inference with Provence. At inference, we feed a
concatenation of a question and a retrieved passage
through Provence, which outputs probabilities of in-
cluding each token in the final context, as well as the
passage score in the case of the unified model. We sim-
ply use a threshold𝑇 to binarize the token probabilites
(keep or not) – which has a direct effect on the com-
pression rate. As shown in the experiments Section, the
choice of a threshold is generally transferable across
various datasets, making the model flexible to be used
out-of-the box in various QA applications2.
We note that our model outputs token-level predictions
despite the sentence-level labeling task. We found that
probabilities of including tokens into the final context
are naturally clustered on the sentence level – see ex-
ample in Appendix Figure 6 – due to the sentence-level
targets used in training. However, in rare cases we
2Note that tuning the threshold per dataset could of course further
improve results.
5

===== PAGE 6/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
Table 2: Time/MFLOPS required for context pruning,
50 samples, with batch size set 1 (1 sample consists of
a query and top retrieved documents). Top-5 retrieved
documents.
Pruner Time ( s) MFLOPS
LongLLMLingua, rate=0.5 194 5.400e+16
LLMLingua2, rate=0.5 38 9.822e+15
RECOMP extr., top=2 12 1.037e+15
RECOMP abstr. 499 5.357e+14
DSLR, th=0.5 26 4.391e+15
Provence (standalone) 25 7.901e+14
Table 3: Speed up in generation due to compression
(Provence, 49% compression). Batch sizes 1 or 256.
Generator bs 1 bs 256
LLama-2-7B ×1.2 ×2
LLama-2-13B ×1.4 ×2
SOLAR-10.7B ×1.4 ×1.9
could still have partial sentences being selected. To
avoid this phenomenon, we apply a “sentence round-
ing” procedure: for each sentence, we check the ratio of
kept tokens (predicted label= 1), and select the entire
sentence only if it is higher than0.5.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental setup
Provence training details.We trainProvence on the
data described in Section 3, using PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019) and HuggingFace transformers (Wolf
et al., 2020). We use DeBERTa-v3 (He et al., 2021a)
as our pretrained model for training the standalone
Provence. For the unified approach, we start training
from an already trained cross-encoder, also based on
DeBERTa-v3 (Lassance & Clinchant, 2023). Note that
in the latter, we initialize the ranking head from its
fine-tuned version, and train the separate pruning head
from scratch.
After preliminary experiments, we set the learning rate
to 3 ×10−6, the batch size to 48 and train models for
one epoch. For joint training, there is a slight trade-off
between pruning and reranking. We set the reranking
regularization coefficient𝜆 to 0.05, chosen as the mini-
mal value that does not substantially degrade reranking
performance on the MS MARCO development set.
Evaluation datasets.We testProvence on a diverse
set of QA datasets. First, we consider commonly used
datasets relying on Wikipedia datastore: Natural Ques-
tions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), TyDi QA (Clark et al.,
2020), PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023b) (all single-hop
questions), and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) (multi-
hop questions). Second, we consider datasets with
datastores from various domains: BioASQ (Nentidis
et al., 2023) (biomedical questions with Pubmed as a
datastore), SyllabusQA (Fernandez et al., 2024) (ques-
tions about educational course logistics, with courses
syllabus as a datastore); and RGB Chen et al. (2024b)
(questions about news with Google-searched news as
contexts). Further details can be found in Appendix A.
Evaluation settings.We conduct experiments using
BERGEN (Rau et al., 2024a), a benchmarking library
for RAG, using the recommended experimental setting.
For each query, we retrieve top-5 relevant passages us-
ing a strong and robust retrieval pipeline: SPLADE-v3
>> DeBERTa-v3 reranker (except for RGB, for which
Google-searched passages are already provided). We
then pass queries prepended with relevant document
(full length or pruned) into LLama-2-7B-chat (Touvron
et al., 2023)3 to generate answers; other retrieval-
generator settings are further reported in Appendix.
Each evaluation dataset comes with short keyword
answers, which we use to evaluate responses using
LLM-based evaluation (LLMeval in Rau et al., 2024a);
match-based metrics are also reported in Appendix. We
additionally measure compression as a portion of the
context which was pruned out.
We compareProvence to publicly available context
pruning models listed in Table 1, except LLMLingua
and Selective Context which were shown to underper-
form LLMLingua2 (Pan et al., 2024). For all context
pruners (except abstractive RECOMP for which it is not
available), we enforce the selection of the first (title)
passage sentence, to avoid ambiguity in understanding
the context by the generator. For extractive RECOMP,
we use the model trained on NQ, consider using top-
1/2/3 sentences, and prepend the passage title to each
sentence. For the LLMLingua family, we vary the com-
pression rate in{0.25,0.5,0.75}and use code provided
on the official repository4. We use the XLM-RoBERTa
model for LLMLingua2. ForProvence, we use𝑇 = 0.1
and 𝑇 = 0.5. We also compare our method to DSLR
based on the same reranker as ours, i.e, DeBERTa-v3.
4.2. Main results
Contextprunersareoftenonlytestedonlimiteddomain
data, e.g., with Wikipedia datastore, and an important
aspect of our work is evaluating context pruning on a
series of QA domains. Figure 2 reports the trade-off
3For main experiments, we chose a “weaker” generator which
relies more on contexts, to create a more challenging setting for
context pruners; results with stronger generators are reported in
Appendix – Figure 8.
4https://github.com/microsoft/LLMLingua
6

===== PAGE 7/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
60 70
0
25
50
75
100compression rate %
Natural Questions (wiki)
45 50 55
0
25
50
75
100
Hotpot QA (wiki)
60 70
0
25
50
75
100
T yDi QA (wiki)
50 55 60
0
25
50
75
100
Pop QA (wiki)
Full context
Provence (w/ reranker)
Provence (standalone)
LLMLingua2
LongLLMLingua
RECOMP (ext)
RECOMP (ext+thr)
RECOMP (abs)
DSLR
Dense-X retrieval40 50
LLM-Eval
0
25
50
75
100compression rate %
Syllabus QA (syllabi)
70 80
LLM-Eval
0
25
50
75
100
BioASQ (Pubmed)
90 95
LLM-Eval
0
25
50
75
100
RGB (news)
Figure 2: Main results for various QA domains, comparingProvence and baseline models.Generator: LLama-2-
7B, retriever: SPLADE-v3,reranker: DeBERTa-v3 (orProvence in the unified setting). Plot titles denote “Dataset
name (datastore type)”. 𝑥-axis denotes QA performance evaluated with LLM-as-a-judge;𝑦-axis denotes the
context compression ratio. For both metrics, the higher the better: the best model would be closest to the top
right corner. Numerical scores are presented in App. Tables 8–9. Main conclusion:Provence consistently lies on
the Pareto front.
between compression (efficiency) and LLM-evaluated
performance (quality), for various QA datasets and con-
text pruning methods. We choose to report a figure per
dataset to better assess thePareto frontof existing so-
lutions, rather than comparing methods with different
compression rates in the same table. Figure 7 in Ap-
pendix further reports similar results with match-based
metric, and Appendix Tables 11–13 show examples of
context pruning with various methods.
First, we observe thatProvence achieves the high-
est performance across pruning methods, for simi-
lar compression ratios. Second, it is noteworthy that
Provence outperforms methods requiring more com-
putations such as LLMLingua models, showing that
efficiency is not traded for effectiveness. Furthermore,
Provence is the only method capable of achieving high
compression levels without (or with negligible) per-
formance drops, on all datasets. Moreover, for some
datasets, e.g., PopQA, pruning withProvence leads to
performance improvements due to noise filtering.
Theeffectofthreshold. Animportantaspectintheout-
of-the-box applicability of context pruners is how much
effort is needed to select the suitable values of hyper-
parameters. ForProvence, it only consists in setting
the pruning threshold𝑇. In Figure 2 (for which𝑇 = 0.1
and 𝑇 = 0.5), we observe thatProvence pruning ratio
automatically varies from 50% to 80%, depending on
the dataset, which demonstrates that the same values
for 𝑇 work well for all considered domains – making
Provence robust to the choice of hyperparameters. If
necessary,userscanstilltuneitfurtherfortheirdatasets
and/or needs. We note that some models specify the
desired compression ratio as a hyperparameter, e.g.,
LLMLingua models or extractive RECOMP (through
top-𝑁 sentences). While it may seem convenient to es-
timate inference cost, the “optimal” compression ratio
(without losing performance) is specific to each partic-
ular question-context pair. Thus, using a threshold as a
hyperparameter is more appropriate for this task. We
also experimented with specifying a threshold in extrac-
tive RECOMP (shown on the same plot) and found that
it often leads to lower performance (compared to top-
𝑁). The reason is that different queries have different
ranges of similarity scores.
Efficiency. We compareProvence with other prun-
ing methods in terms of efficiency. Table 2 reports
compression time and MFLOPS5 required by differ-
5We use the PyTorch profiler to report FLOPS required by each
7

===== PAGE 8/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
0.0 0.5 1.0
0
1
2
Avg number of
selected sents
0.0 0.5 1.0
Position in text
0.0
0.5
1.0Match 1-sent "needle"
2-sent "needle"
0 1 2 3 >=4
0123>=4
num sents by llama3-8b
98 2 0 0 0
0.68 56 26 10 7.4
0.46 14 36 25 25
0 4.7 15 26 53
0 3 3.9 0.99 92
NQ (T=0.1)
0 1 2 3 >=4
0123>=4
96 3 1 0 0
2 60 26 7.7 3.8
2 27 39 19 13
2.5 12 28 28 29
0 15 10 25 50
Hotpot QA (T=0.1)
0 1 2 3 >=4
num. sents by Provence
0123>=4
num sents by llama3-8b
68 16 5 3 2
6.3 35 28 12 18
2.4 9.7 22 22 44
0 4.2 11 4.2 81
1.1 1.1 3.8 3.2 91
Syllabus QA (T=0.1)
0 1 2 3 >=4
num. sents by Provence
0123>=4
72 17 9 2 0
1.6 39 27 15 17
0.091 6.5 24 24 46
0 2.1 9.3 17 71
0 0.97 2.6 6.6 90
BioASQ (T=0.1)
000
001
002
003
004
005
006
007
008
009
010
011
012
013
014
015
016
017
018
019
020
021
022
023
024
025
026
027
028
029
030
031
032
033
034
035
036
037
038
039
040
041
042
043
044
045
046
047
048
049
050
051
052
053
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Context
granularity
LLMeval
(full
cntx)
LLMeval
(pruned
cntx)
Comp-
ression
Natural questions
2 sents 66.8 66.1 2%
6 sents 68.3 68.1 50%
10 sents 68.8 67.5 64%
100 words 66.5 65.6 48%
Hotpot QA
2 sents 52.8 52.8 8%
6 sents 54.6 55.1 55%
10 sents 55.7 54.0 68%
100 words 54.4 54.2 53%
PROVENCE : EFFICIENT AND ROBUST CONTEXT PRUN -
ING FOR RETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED GENERATION
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
Abstract will places here
1 I NTRODUCTION
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) became a widely-used paradigm for improving factuality,
attribution, and domain-adaptiveness of large language models (LLMs) Das et al. (2019); Asai et al.
(2024); Seo et al. (2019); Lewis et al. (2020); Mallen et al. (2023); Min et al. (2023). Augmenting a
given user’s query with a retrieved relevant context helps to avoid the generation of unthruthful
information and enables the provision of references used to generate the answer. Furthermore,
using a domain-specific datastore may enable access to the previously unknown knowledge without
LLM finetuning. One more important advantage of the RAG approach is the easy plug-and-play
architecture such as LangChain: developers may choose components (retrievers, generator LLMs,
context granularity etc.) which best suit their particular cases and achieve high final performance.
At the same time, the use of RAG adds computational overhead due to the increased input length,
and may also propagateirrelevant informationpresent in retrieved contexts into generated responses.
One solution to these issues is developing more efficient and robust LLMs, by making architectural
changes to process long contexts more efficiently Nawrot et al. (2024) and increasing the diversity
of the tuning data to improve processing of irrelevant contexts Lin et al. (2024). However, this
approach requires highly resource-consuming LLM tuning and thus is hard to apply to an arbitrary
picked LLM. An alternative solution consists of pruning retrieved contexts, which removes context
parts irrelevant to the user’s query and hence reduces context lengths and speeds up generation. Such
context pruning module can be used in a plug-and-play manner with any generator LLM, featuring
easy use and also providing better transparency in the RAG pipeline.
Despite initial efforts on developing context pruners for RAG, none of the existing solutions con-
stitute a model ready to be used in the described plug-and-play manner in practice. First, most of
the works train context pruner for each dataset individually and do not target nor test pruners trans-
ferability to other data domains . Second, some approaches are designed for a simplified setting,
with an assumption that only one sentence will be relevant to the input query. However, in practice
contexts may contain various portions of relevant information, from empty to full relevant context,
and pruners should be flexible enough to detect it. Third, many works propose context pruners that
are not efficient enough to be used in practice. This includes using billion-size LLMs as base models
for pruners and designing abstractive pruners which require non-parallelizable autoregressive gen-
eration of the final context. A more practical setting is to tune asmall-size model such as BERT into
an extractive pruner, i.e. with a lightweight prediction head for selecting relevant context parts.
Table 1 summarizes properties of various existing methods along specified dimensions. Only one
approach, LLMLingua2, satisfies all listed criteria, however, its goal is to prune out low-level gram-
matical units such as articles or interjections, so it is query-independent and prunes on the token
level by design. A more suitable design for the task is query-dependent sentence-level pruning,
which prunes out semantic units (sentences) that are not relevant to the query. This approach nat-
urally enables higher level of compression, but it also could be combined with token-level pruning
such as LLMLingua2.
In this work, we introduce Provence (PRuning Of retrieVEd relevaNt ContExt), an efficient and
robust sentence-level context pruner for question answering, applicable out-of-the-box in various
scenarios, i.e. for contexts from various domains and with variable amount of information relevant
to the query. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose an approach for training an efficient and robust context pruner for QA. Our
approach consists of three key ingredients: (a) a strategy for selecting diverse training
data and data augmentation, to enable robustness; (b) an effective way of prompting strong
open-source LLMs for producing a silver labelling of variable portions of relevant contexts;
and (c) a sequence labeling objective for training an efficient, lightweight extractive pruner
on the silver labeled data. [it would be mega cool to say about combination with reranker
here]
• We propose a joint training of a reranker and pruner.
• We conduct multiple ablations to demonstrate which techniques are essential for training
robust context pruners.
• In the extensive experiments with various data domains, question types, and context gran-
ularities, we demonstrate the wide applicability of our model in QA RAG applications.
1
Figure 3: Analyses. (Left) Needle-in-the-haystack test allowing the control of the position of the ground truth
sentence(s) in the context. (Middle) Comparison of the number of selected sentences by the silver predictor
(LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct) andProvence. Heatmaps are normalized by rows: a cell in position(𝑖, 𝑗)indicates which
percentage of contexts that were pruned into𝑖 sentences by the silver predictor, were pruned into𝑗 sentences by
Provence. (Right) TestingProvence in settings with different context lengths. All experiments are done with
unified Provence, 𝑇 = 0.1.
ent pruning methods. As expected, LongLLMLingua
(based on LLama-2-7B-chat) is the slowest context
pruner. RECOMPabstr. requireslessMFLOPScompared
to Provence, but its autoregressive nature makes it
slower in practice6. Note that in the case of the uni-
fied model, pruning is almost free – as it’s part of the
re-ranking step. Table 3 reports speed-up gains due to
compression withProvence model (∼50% compres-
sion rate). All runs were performed on single Tesla
V100-SXM2-32GB GPU with vllm Kwon et al. (2023).
With large batch sizes, we systematically observe 2×
speed-ups at inference, while smaller batch sizes lead
to lower gains (especially for smaller models). We as-
sumethisismostlyduetotheCPU/GPUcommunication
bottleneck, which masks inference gains due to com-
pression.
4.3. Analysis
In this Section, we conduct a more fine-grained evalua-
tion to better understand the properties ofProvence.
Robustness to the position of relevant information
in the context.We design a needle-in-the-haystack ex-
periment which allows us to check the performance of
Provence on a simple toy example and to evaluate its
robustnessw.r.t. thepositionoftherelevantinformation
intheinputcontext. Wewrite5questionsandanswers 7,
pruner.
6This highlights the fact that MFLOPS do not always align with
real inference time, due to different architectural choices.
7Example: “Which library was used in the experiments?”, answer:
“Experiments were conducted using the Bergen library”. Example re-
formulation into a 2-sentence answer: “Experiments were conducted
and insert answers (“needles”) at random positions
between sentences, in a subset of 100 passages sam-
pled from the Wikipedia datastore. Ideally,Provence
should only select the “needle” sentences and filter out
all other sentences in contexts. We plot the number of
selected sentences and percentage of cases when the
pruned context contains the “needle” (Figure 3, (Left)).
We consider two settings: with 1- and 2-sentence “nee-
dles”. We observe thatProvence correctly selects “nee-
dle” sentence(s) in most cases, except at leftmost and
rightmost positions.8 In most casesProvence does not
select any irrelevant sentences. The results are similar
for both simpler (1-sentence) and harder (2-sentence)
“needles” showingProvence’s flexibility in detecting
the number of relevant sentences, discussed below in
more details.
Adaptability to the variable number of relevant sen-
tences. To evaluate the capability ofProvence to
dynamically detect the number of relevant sentences in
the context, we compare the number of sentences𝐿se-
lected byProvence and by a silver oracle, for question-
context examples from various datasets. A silver oracle
is easy to construct for𝐿= 0, by pairing questions with
randomly sampled contexts. For𝐿 ⩾ 1, we use the label-
ing produced by Llama-3-8B-Instruct. Figure 3 (Middle)
shows that the number of relevant sentences detected
using a library. Its name is Bergen.”
8The reason for the drops in the left-most and right-most positions
is that training data has little examples of the corresponding types
of relevant sentences, see e.g., statistics for the rightmost position in
the App. Figure 5,(Right). We plan to work on further improving
processing of these positions in future work.
8

===== PAGE 23/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
Table 12: Example of context pruning with various approaches.Provence correctly detects that the entire
passage is relevant to the query, same as LongLLMLingua, while RECOMP (ext) is by design not capable of making
such a decision.
Question where does the sweetness of fruit come from
Original context Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at concen-
trations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is glycyrrhizin, the
sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter than sucrose.
Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the South American
shrub "Stevia rebaudiana". It is roughly 250 times sweeter than sucrose. Another
class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins such as thaumatin, found
in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme, an antibiotic protein found in
chicken eggs, is also sweet.
Provence Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at concen-
trations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is glycyrrhizin, the
sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter than sucrose.
Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the South American
shrub "Stevia rebaudiana". It is roughly 250 times sweeter than sucrose. Another
class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins such as thaumatin, found
in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme, an antibiotic protein found in
chicken eggs, is also sweet.
RECOMP(ext, top-3) It is roughly 250 times sweeter than sucrose. Another commercially important
example is stevioside, from the South American shrub "Stevia rebaudiana". A
number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at concentrations much
lower than sugar.
RECOMP (abs) [empty context]
LLMLingua2
(comp.50%)
Sweetness plant species produce glycosides sweet lower sugar glycyrrhizin sweet
licorice root 30 times sweeter sucrose stevioside South American shrub "Stevia 250
times sweeter sucrose sweeteners sweet proteins thaumatin West African katemfe
fruit Hen egg lysozyme antibiotic protein chicken eggs sweet
LongLLMLingua
(comp. 50%)
Sweetness. A number of plant species produce glycosides that are sweet at concen-
trations much lower than sugar. The most well-known example is glycyrrhizin, the
sweet component of licorice root, which is about 30 times sweeter than sucrose.
Another commercially important example is stevioside, from the South American
shrub "Stevia rebaudiana". It is roughly 250 times sweeter than sucrose. Another
class of potent natural sweeteners are the sweet proteins such as thaumatin, found
in the West African katemfe fruit. Hen egg lysozyme, an antibiotic protein found in
chicken eggs, is also sweet.
23

===== PAGE 24/24 =====
Provence: efficient and robust context pruning for retrieval-augmented generation
Table 13: Example of context pruning with various approaches. Provence selects one most relevant sentence,
which is also ranked first by RECOMP (ext). RECOMP (abs) decides that no information is relevant to the query,
while LongLLMLingua on the contrary keeps the entire input, dropping some punctuation marks. LLMLingua2
removes too many tokens which makes text hardly understandable.
Question what was the tower of london originally used for
Original context Tower of London. In the 16th century, the Tower acquired an enduring reputation
as a grim, forbidding prison. This had not always been the case. As a royal castle,
it was used by the monarch to imprison people for various reasons, however these
were usually high-status individuals for short periods rather than common citizenry
as there were plenty of prisons elsewhere for such people. Contrary to the popular
image of the Tower, prisoners were able to make their life easier by purchasing
amenities such as better food or tapestries through the Lieutenant of the Tower. As
holding prisoners was originally an incidental role of the Tower – as would have been
the case for any castle – there was no purpose-built accommodation for prisoners
until 1687 when a brick shed, a "Prison for Soldiers", was built to the north-west
of the White Tower. The Tower’s reputation for torture and imprisonment derives
largely from 16th-century religious propagandists and 19th-century romanticists.
Provence Tower of London. As a royal castle, it was used by the monarch to imprison people
for various reasons, however these were usually high-status individuals for short
periods rather than common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons elsewhere for
such people.
RECOMP(ext, sorted
top-3 sents)
As a royal castle, it was used by the monarch to imprison people for various reasons,
however these were usually high-status individuals for short periods rather than
common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons elsewhere for such people. This
had not always been the case. The Tower’s reputation for torture and imprisonment
derives largely from 16th-century religious propagandists and 19th-century roman-
ticists.
RECOMP (abs) [empty context]
LLMLingua2
(comp.25%)
Tower London 16th century grim prison royal castle monarch high-status common
citizenry prisoners amenities food Lieutenant Tower no-built accommodation until
1687 "Prison for north-west White Tower reputation torture imprisonment 16th-
century propagandists 19th-century romanticists
LongLLMLingua
(comp. 25%)
Tower of London In the 6th century, the acquired an enduring reputation as grim,
forbidd prison. This had always been the case As a royal castle, it was by the
to imprison people for various reasons however these were usually high-status
individuals for short rather than common citizenry as there were plenty of prisons
elsewhere for such people. Contrary popular of the Tower, prisoners were able to
make their life easier purchasing amenities such better food or tapestries through
Lieutenant of the Tower. holding prisoners was originally incident role of the–
would have been the case for any – was purpose- accommodation for prisoners until
167 a "Prison for Sold", was to thewest of White Tower. The’s reputation torture
imprisonment derives largely from 6th- religious propagandists and 19th-century
romanticists.
24