
===== PAGE 1/30 =====
Preprint.
SELF -RAG : L EARNING TO RETRIEVE , GENERATE , AND
CRITIQUE THROUGH SELF -REFLECTION
Akari Asai†, Zeqiu Wu†, Yizhong Wang†§, Avirup Sil‡, Hannaneh Hajishirzi†§
†University of Washington §Allen Institute for AI ‡IBM Research AI
{akari,zeqiuwu,yizhongw,hannaneh}@cs.washington.edu, avi@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Despite their remarkable capabilities, large language models (LLMs) often produce
responses containing factual inaccuracies due to their sole reliance on the paramet-
ric knowledge they encapsulate. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), an ad
hoc approach that augments LMs with retrieval of relevant knowledge, decreases
such issues. However, indiscriminately retrieving and incorporating a fixed number
of retrieved passages, regardless of whether retrieval is necessary, or passages are
relevant, diminishes LM versatility or can lead to unhelpful response generation.
We introduce a new framework called Self-Reflective Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (SELF -RAG) that enhances an LM’s quality and factuality through retrieval
and self-reflection. Our framework trains a single arbitrary LM that adaptively
retrieves passages on-demand, and generates and reflects on retrieved passages
and its own generations using special tokens, called reflection tokens. Generating
reflection tokens makes the LM controllable during the inference phase, enabling it
to tailor its behavior to diverse task requirements. Experiments show that SELF -
RAG (7B and 13B parameters) significantly outperforms state-of-the-art LLMs
and retrieval-augmented models on a diverse set of tasks. Specifically, SELF -RAG
outperforms ChatGPT and retrieval-augmented Llama2-chat on Open-domain QA,
reasoning and fact verification tasks, and it shows significant gains in improving
factuality and citation accuracy for long-form generations relative to these models.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
State-of-the-art LLMs continue to struggle with factual errors (Mallen et al., 2023; Min et al., 2023)
despite their increased model and data scale (Ouyang et al., 2022). Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) methods (Figure 1 left; Lewis et al. 2020; Guu et al. 2020) augment the input of LLMs
with relevant retrieved passages, reducing factual errors in knowledge-intensive tasks (Ram et al.,
2023; Asai et al., 2023a). However, these methods may hinder the versatility of LLMs or introduce
unnecessary or off-topic passages that lead to low-quality generations (Shi et al., 2023) since they
retrieve passages indiscriminately regardless of whether the factual grounding is helpful. Moreover,
the output is not guaranteed to be consistent with retrieved relevant passages (Gao et al., 2023) since
the models are not explicitly trained to leverage and follow facts from provided passages. This
work introduces Self-Reflective Retrieval-augmented Generation ( SELF -RAG) to improve an
LLM’s generation quality, including its factual accuracy without hurting its versatility, via on-demand
retrieval and self-reflection. We train an arbitrary LM in an end-to-end manner to learn to reflect on
its own generation process given a task input by generating both task output and intermittent special
tokens (i.e., reflection tokens). Reflection tokens are categorized into retrieval and critique tokens to
indicate the need for retrieval and its generation quality respectively (Figure 1 right). In particular,
given an input prompt and preceding generations, SELF -RAG first determines if augmenting the
continued generation with retrieved passages would be helpful. If so, it outputs a retrieval token that
calls a retriever model on demand (Step 1). Subsequently,SELF -RAG concurrently processes multiple
retrieved passages, evaluating their relevance and thengenerating corresponding task outputs (Step
2). It then generates critique tokens to criticize its own output and choose best one (Step 3) in terms
of factuality and overall quality. This process differs from conventional RAG (Figure 1 left), which
1Our code and trained models are available at https://selfrag.github.io/.
1
arXiv:2310.11511v1  [cs.CL]  17 Oct 2023

===== PAGE 2/30 =====
Preprint.
Step 1: Retrieve K documents
California was named after a ﬁctional 
island in a Spanish book. 
Prompt How did US states get their names? 
US states got their names from a variety of 
sources. Eleven states are named after an 
individual person  (e.g, California was named 
after Christopher Columbus) . Some states 
including Texas and Utah, are named after 
Native American tribe.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) Ours: Self-reﬂective Retrieval-Augmented Generation (Self-RAG) 
Popular names by states. In Texas, 
Emma is a popular baby name. 
Of the ﬁfty states, eleven are named 
after an individual person. 
Prompt How did US states get their names? + 
Step 2: Prompt LM with K docs and generate
Retriever
LM
Prompt How did US states get their names? 
US states got their names from a variety of sources. Retrieve
Step 1: Retrieve on demand  
Prompt +  
11 of 50 state namesRelevant
Step 2: Generate segment in parallel 
come from persons. Supported
Irrelevant Texas is named
after a Native American tribe. 
Step 3: Critique outputs and select best segment
origins in a 16th-century novel 
Las Sergas de Esplandián. 
California's name has itsRelevant
Partially
US states got their names from a variety of sources. 11 of 50 
states names are come from persons.    26 states are named 
after Native Americans, including Utah. 
Prompt: Write an essay of your best summer vacation
 Prompt: Write an essay of your best summer vacation
No Retrieval My best summer vacation is when my family and I embarked on a road trip along …My best… 
>
Repeat.…
No information in passagesContradictory
>
Prompt +  
 Prompt +  
Retrieve
Figure 1: Overview of SELF -RAG. SELF -RAG learns to retrieve, critique, and generate text passages
to enhance overall generation quality, factuality, and verifiability.
consistently retrieves a fixed number of documents for generation regardless of the retrieval necessity
(e.g., the bottom figure example does not require factual knowledge) and never second visits the
generation quality. Moreover, SELF -RAG provides citations for each segment with its self-assessment
of whether the output is supported by the passage, leading to easier fact verification.
SELF -RAG trains an arbitrary LM to generate text with reflection tokens by unifying them as the
next token prediction from the expanded model vocabulary. We train our generator LM on a diverse
collection of text interleaved with reflection tokens and retrieved passages. Reflection tokens, inspired
by reward models used in reinforcement learning (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022), are
inserted offline into the original corpus by a trained critic model. This eliminates the need to host a
critic model during training, reducing overhead. The critic model, in part, is supervised on a dataset
of input, output, and corresponding reflection tokens collected by prompting a propriety LM (i.e.,
GPT-4; OpenAI 2023). While we draw inspiration from studies that use control tokens to start and
guide text generation (Lu et al., 2022; Keskar et al., 2019), our trained LM uses critique tokens to
assess its own predictions after each generated segment as an integral part of the generation output.
SELF -RAG further enables a customizable decoding algorithm to satisfy hard or soft constraints,
which are defined by reflection token predictions. In particular, our inference-time algorithm enables
us to (1) flexibly adjust retrieval frequency for different downstream applications and (2) customize
models’ behaviors to user preferences by leveraging reflection tokens through segment-level beam
search using the weighted linear sum of the reflection token probabilities as segment score.
Empirical results on six tasks, including reasoning and long-form generation, demonstrate that SELF -
RAG significantly outperforms pre-trained and instruction-tuned LLMs that have more parameters and
widely adopted RAG approaches with higher citation accuracy. In particular, SELF -RAG outperforms
retrieval-augmented ChatGPT on four tasks, Llama2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) and Alpaca (Dubois
et al., 2023) on all tasks. Our analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of training and inference with
reflection tokens for overall performance improvements as well as test-time model customizations
(e.g., balancing the trade-off between citation previsions and completeness).
2 R ELATED WORK
Retrieval-Augmented Generation. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) augments the input
space of LMs with retrieved text passages (Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020), leading to large
improvements in knowledge-intensive tasks after fine-tuning or used with off-the-shelf LMs (Ram
et al., 2023). A more recent work (Luo et al., 2023) instruction-tunes an LM with a fixed number
2

===== PAGE 3/30 =====
Preprint.
of retrieved passages prepended to input, or pre-train a retriever and LM jointly, followed by few-
shot fine-tuning on task datasets (Izacard et al., 2022b). While prior work often retrieves only
once at the beginning, Jiang et al. (2023) propose to adaptively retrieve passages for generation
on top of a proprietary LLM or Schick et al. (2023) train an LM to generate API calls for named
entities. Yet, the improved task performance of such approaches often comes at the expense of
runtime efficiency (Mallen et al., 2023), robustness to irrelevant context (Shi et al., 2023), and lack of
attributions (Liu et al., 2023a; Gao et al., 2023). We introduce a method to train an arbitrary LM to
learn to use retrieval on-demand for diverse instruction-following queries and introduce controlled
generation guided by reflections tokens to further improve generation quality and attributions.
Concurrent RAG work. A few concurrent works2 on RAG propose new training or prompting
strategies to improve widely-adopted RAG approaches. Lin et al. (2023) fine-tune both the retriever
and LM on instruction-tuning datasets in two steps. While we also train our model on diverse
instruction-following datasets, SELF -RAG enables retrieval on demand and selection of the best
possible model output via fine-grained self-reflection, making it widely applicable and more robust
and controllable. Yoran et al. (2023) use a natural language inference model and Xu et al. (2023) use
a summarization model to filter out or compress retrieved passages before using them to prompt the
LM to generate the output. SELF -RAG processes passages in parallel and filters out irrelevant ones
through self-reflection, without relying on external models at inference. Moreover, our self-reflection
mechanism also evaluates other aspects of the model output quality including factuality. LATS (Zhou
et al., 2023) prompt off-the-shelf LMs to search for relevant information for question answering tasks
and to generate with tree search, guided by LM-generated value scores. While their value function
simply indicates an overall score of each generation, SELF -RAG trains to an arbitrary LM to learn to
generate fine-grained self-reflection and customizable inference.
Training and generating with critics. Training LLMs with reinforcement learning (e.g., Proximal
Policy Optimization or PPO; Schulman et al. 2017) from human feedback (RLHF) has proven
effective in aligning LLMs with human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022). Wu et al. (2023) introduce
fine-grained RLHF with multiple reward models. Though our work also studies fine-grained critique
on retrieval and generation, we train our target LM on task examples augmented with reflection
tokens from a critic model offline, with a far lower training cost compared to RLHF. In addition,
reflection tokens in SELF -RAG enable controllable generation at inference, while RLHF focuses on
human preference alignment during training. Other works use general control tokens to guide LM
generation (Lu et al., 2022; Korbak et al., 2023), whileSELF -RAG uses reflection tokens to decide the
need for retrieval and to self-evaluate generation quality. Xie et al. (2023) propose a self-evaluation-
guided decoding framework, but they focus only on reasoning tasks with one evaluation dimension
(reasoning path consistency) and without retrieval. Recent work on LLM refinement (Dhuliawala
et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Paul et al., 2023) prompts a model to generate task output, natural
language feedback and refined task output iteratively, but at the cost of inference efficiency.
3 S ELF -RAG: L EARNING TO RETRIEVE , GENERATE AND CRITIQUE
We introduce Self-Reflective Retrieval-Augmented Generation ( SELF -RAG), shown in Figure 1.
SELF -RAG is a framework that enhances the quality and factuality of an LLM through retrieval and
self-reflection, without sacrificing LLM’s original creativity and versatility. Our end-to-end training
lets an LM M generate text informed by retrieved passages, if needed, and criticize the output by
learning to generate special tokens. These reflection tokens (Table 1) signal the need for retrieval
or confirm the output’s relevance, support, or completeness. In contrast, common RAG approaches
retrieve passages indiscriminately, without ensuring complete support from cited sources.
3.1 P ROBLEM FORMALIZATION AND OVERVIEW
Formally, given input x, we train M to sequentially generate textual outputs y consisting of multiple
segments y = [y1, . . . , yT ], where yt indicates a sequence of tokens for the t-th segment.3 Generated
tokens in yt include text from the original vocabulary as well as the reflection tokens (Table 1).
2All work is arXived within a week of this preprint.
3In this paper, we treat one sentence as a segment in our experiments, but our framework is applicable to any
segment unit (i.e., sub-sentence).
3

===== PAGE 4/30 =====
Preprint.
Type Input Output Definitions
Retrieve x / x, y {yes, no, continue} Decides when to retrieve with R
ISREL x, d {relevant, irrelevant} d provides useful information to solve x.
ISSUP x, d, y {fully supported, partially
supported, no support}
All of the verification-worthy statement in y
is supported by d.
ISUSE x, y {5, 4, 3, 2, 1} y is a useful response to x.
Table 1: Four types of reflection tokens used inSELF -RAG. Each type uses several tokens to represent
its output values. The bottom three rows are three types of Critique tokens, and the bold text indicates
the most desirable critique tokens. x, y, dindicate input, output, and a relevant passage, respectively.
Algorithm 1 SELF -RAG Inference
Require: Generator LM M, Retriever R, Large-scale passage collections {d1, . . . , dN }
1: Input: input prompt x and preceding generation y<t, Output: next output segment yt
2: M predicts Retrieve given (x, y<t)
3: if Retrieve == Yes then
4: Retrieve relevant text passages D using R given (x, yt−1) ▷ Retrieve
5: M predicts ISREL given x, dand yt given x, d, y<t for each d ∈ D ▷ Generate
6: M predicts ISSUP and ISUSE given x, yt, dfor each d ∈ D ▷ Critique
7: Rank yt based on ISREL , ISSUP , ISUSE ▷ Detailed in Section 3.3
8: else if Retrieve == No then
9: Mgen predicts yt given x ▷ Generate
10: Mgen predicts ISUSE given x, yt ▷ Critique
Inference overview. Figure 1 and Algorithm 1 present an overview of SELF -RAG at inference. For
every x and preceding generation y<t, the model decodes a retrieval token to evaluate the utility
of retrieval. If retrieval is not required, the model predicts the next output segment, as it does in a
standard LM. If retrieval is needed, the model generates: a critique token to evaluate the retrieved
passage’s relevance, the next response segment, and a critique token to evaluate if the information in
the response segment is supported by the passage. Finally, a new critique token evaluates the overall
utility of the response.4 To generate each segment, SELF -RAG processes multiple passages in parallel
and uses its own generated reflection tokens to enforce soft constraints (Section 3.3) or hard control
(Algorithm 1) over the generated task output. For instance, in Figure 1 (right), the retrieved passages
d1 is selected at the first time step since d2 does not provide direct evidence ( ISREL is Irrelevant)
and d3 output is only partially supported while d1 are fully supported.
Training overview. SELF -RAG enables an arbitrary LM to generate text with reflection tokens
by unifying them as next token predictions from the expanded model vocabulary (i.e., the original
vocabulary plus reflection tokens). Specifically, we train the generator model M on a curated corpus
with interleaving passages retrieved by a retriever R and reflection tokens predicted by a critic model
C (summarized in Appendix Algorithm 2). We train C to generate reflection tokens for evaluating
retrieved passages and the quality of a given task output (Section 3.2.1). Using the critic model, we
update the training corpus by inserting reflection tokens into task outputs offline. Subsequently, we
train the final generator model (M) using the conventional LM objective (Section 3.2.2) to enable
M to generate reflection tokens by itself without relying on the critic at inference time.
3.2 S ELF -RAG TRAINING
Here, we describe the supervised data collection and training of two models, the criticC (Section 3.2.1)
and the generator M (Section 3.2.2).
3.2.1 T RAINING THE CRITIC MODEL
Data collection for critic model. Manual annotation of reflection tokens for each segment is
expensive (Wu et al., 2023). A state-of-the-art LLM like GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) can be effectively
4We follow Liu et al. (2023a) in using a “perceived” utility value that is independent of retrieved passages.
4

===== PAGE 5/30 =====
Preprint.
Input: How did US states get their names? Input: Write an essay of your best summer vacation
Output: My best summer vacation was a magical escape 
to the coastal town of Santorini. The azure waters, 
charming white-washed building are unforgettable. 
Critic LM
Output: 1 of 50 states names come from persons. For instance, Louisiana was named in honor 
of King Louis XIV of France and Georgia was named after King George II. 
Retrieve
Partially
Augmented Output:                Retrieve
<p>LOUISIANA: Named in
<p>Of the ﬁfty states, eleven are named after an individual person</p>.  
             11 of 50 states’ names come from person. Relevant Supported
honor of Louis XIV of France.</p>.  Relevant For instance, Louisiana was named after King Louis XIV, and
Util: 5Georgia was named after King George II. 
Util: 5
Augmented Output:                     My best summer 
vacation was a magical escape to the coastal town of 
Santorini.                     The azure waters, charming white-
washed building are unforgettable experience.
No Retrieval
No Retrieval
Retriever
Figure 2: SELF -RAG training examples. The left example does not require retrieval while the right
one requires retrieval; thus, passages are inserted. More examples are in Appendix Table 4.
used to generate such feedback (Liu et al., 2023b). However, depending on such proprietary LMs
can raise API costs and diminish reproducibility (Chen et al., 2023). We create supervised data by
prompting GPT-4 to generate reflection tokens and then distill their knowledge into an in-houseC.
For each group of reflection tokens, we randomly sample instances from the original training data:
{Xsample, Ysample} ∼ {X, Y}. As different reflection token groups have their own definitions and
input, as shown in Table 1, we use different instruction prompts for them. Here, we use Retrieve as
an example. We prompt GPT-4 with a type-specific instruction (“Given an instruction, make a
judgment on whether finding some external documents from the web helps to generate a better
response.”) followed by few-shot demonstrations I the original task input x and output y to predict
an appropriate reflection token as text: p(r|I, x, y). Manual assessment reveals that GPT-4 reflection
token predictions show high agreement with human evaluations. We collect 4k-20k supervised
training data for each type and combine them to form training data for C. Appendix Section D shows
the full list of instructions, and A.1 contains more details and our analysis.
Critic learning. After we collect training data Dcritic, we initialize C with a pre-trained LM and
train it on Dcritic using a standard conditional language modeling objective, maximizing likelihood:
max
C
E((x,y),r)∼Dcritic log pC(r|x, y), rfor reflection tokens. (1)
Though the initial model can be any pre-trained LM, we use the same one as the generator LM
(i.e., Llama 2-7B; Touvron et al. 2023) for C initialization. The critic achieves a higher than 90%
agreement with GPT-4-based predictions on most reflection token categories (Appendix Table 5).
3.2.2 T RAINING THE GENERATOR MODEL
Data collection for generator. Given an input-output pair (x, y), we augment the original output
y using the retrieval and critic models to create supervised data that precisely mimics the SELF -
RAG inference-time process (Section 3.1). For each segment yt ∈ y, we run C to assess whether
additional passages could help to enhance generation. If retrieval is required, the retrieval special
token Retrieve =Yes is added, and R retrieves the top K passages, D. For each passage, C further
evaluates whether the passage is relevant and predicts ISREL . If a passage is relevant, C further
evaluates whether the passage supports the model generation and predicts ISSUP . Critique tokens
ISREL and ISSUP are appended after the retrieved passage or generations. At the end of the output, y
(or yT ), C predicts the overall utility token ISUSE , and an augmented output with reflection tokens
and the original input pair is added to Dgen. See the example training data in Figure 2.
Generator learning. We train the generator model M by training on the curated corpus augmented
with reflection tokens Dgen using the standard next token objective:
max
M
E(x,y,r)∼Dgen log pM(y, r|x). (2)
Unlike C training (Eq. 1), M learns to predict the target output as well as the reflection tokens. During
training, we mask out the retrieved text chunks (surrounded by <p> and </p> in Figure 2) for loss
calculation and expand the original vocabulary V with a set of reflection tokens { Critique , Retrieve }.
Connections to prior work on learning with critique. Recent work incorporates additional
critique (feedback) during training, e.g., RLHF (Ouyang et al. 2022) via PPO. While PPO relies on
5

===== PAGE 6/30 =====
Preprint.
separate reward models during training, we compute critique offline and directly insert them into the
training corpus, where the generator LM is trained with a standard LM objective. This significantly
reduces training costs compared to PPO. Our work also relates to prior work that incorporates special
tokens to control generation (Keskar et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2022; Korbak et al., 2023). OurSELF -RAG
learns to generate special tokens to evaluate its own predictionafter each generated segment, enabling
the use of a soft re-ranking mechanism or hard constraints at inference (discussed next).
3.3 S ELF -RAG INFERENCE
Generating reflection tokens to self-evaluate its own output makes SELF -RAG controllable during the
inference phase, enabling it to tailor its behavior to diverse task requirements. For tasks demanding
factual accuracy (Min et al., 2023), we aim for the model to retrieve passages more frequently to
ensure that the output aligns closely with the available evidence. Conversely, in more open-ended
tasks, like composing a personal experience essay, the emphasis shifts towards retrieving less and
prioritizing the overall creativity or utility score. In this section, we describe approaches to enforce
control to meet these distinct objectives during the inference process.
Adaptive retrieval with threshold.SELF -RAG dynamically decides when to retrieve text passages by
predicting Retrieve . Alternatively, our framework allows a threshold to be set. Specifically, if the prob-
ability of generating the Retrieve =Yes token normalized over all output tokens in Retrieve surpasses a
designated threshold, we trigger retrieval (details in Appendix Section A.3).
Tree-decoding with critique tokens. At each segment step t, when retrieval is required, based either
on hard or soft conditions, R retrieves K passages, and the generator M processes each passage in
parallel and outputs K different continuation candidates. We conduct a segment-level beam search
(with the beam size=B) to obtain the top-B segment continuations at each timestamp t, and return
the best sequence at the end of generation. The score of each segment yt with respect to passage d is
updated with a critic score S that is the linear weighted sum of the normalized probability of each
Critique token type. For each critique token group G (e.g., ISREL ), we denote its score at timestamp
t as sG
t , and we compute a segment score as follows:
f(yt, d,Critique ) =p(yt|x, d, y<t)) +S( Critique ), where (3)
S( Critique ) =
X
G∈G
wGsG
t for G = { ISREL , ISSUP , ISUSE }, (4)
where sG
t = pt(ˆr)PNG
i=1 pt(ri)
stands for the generation probability of the most desirable reflection token
ˆr (e.g., ISREL =Relevant) for the critique token type G with NG distinct tokens (that represent
different possible values for G). The weights wG in Eq. 4 are hyperparameters that can be adjusted
at inference time to enable customized behaviors at test time. For instance, to ensure that result
y is mostly supported by evidence, we can set a weight term for the ISSUP score higher, while
relatively lowering weights for other aspects. Alternatively, we could further enforce hard constraints
during decoding using Critique . Instead of using a soft reward function in Eq. 4, we could explicitly
filter out a segment continuation when the model generates an undesirable Critique token (e.g.,
ISSUP =No support) . Balancing the trade-off between multiple preferences has been studied
in RLHF (Touvron et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023), which often requires training to change models’
behaviors. SELF -RAG tailors an LM with no additional training.
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 T ASKS AND DATASETS
We conduct evaluations of our SELF -RAG and diverse baselines on a range of downstream tasks,
holistically evaluating outputs with metrics designed to assess overall correctness, factuality, and
fluency. Throughout these experiments, we conduct zero-shot evaluations, where we provide instruc-
tions describing tasks without few-shot demonstrations (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022). Details of
our experiments’ settings, including test-time instructions, are available in the Appendix Section B.1.
Closed-set tasks include two datasets, i.e., a factverification dataset about public health (PubHealth;
Zhang et al. 2023) and a multiple-choice reasoning dataset created from scientific exams ( ARC-
6

===== PAGE 7/30 =====
Preprint.
Challenge; Clark et al. 2018). We use accuracy as an evaluation metric and report on the test set. We
aggregate the answer probabilities of target classes for both of these datasets (Appendix Section B.2).
Short-form generations tasks include two open-domain question answering (QA) datasets,
PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023) and TriviaQA-unfiltered (Joshi et al., 2017), where systems need
to answer arbitrary questions about factual knowledge. For PopQA, we use the long-tail subset,
consisting of 1,399 rare entity queries whose monthly Wikipedia page views are less than 100. As the
TriviaQA-unfiltered (open) test set is not publicly available, we follow prior work’s validation and
test split (Min et al., 2019; Guu et al., 2020), using 11,313 test queries for evaluation. We evaluate
performance based on whether gold answers are included in the model generations instead of strictly
requiring exact matching, following Mallen et al. (2023); Schick et al. (2023).
Long-form generation tasks include a biography generation task (Min et al., 2023) and a long-form
QA task ALCE-ASQA Gao et al. (2023); Stelmakh et al. (2022). We use FactScore (Min et al.,
2023) to evaluate biographies, and we use official metrics of correctness (str-em), fluency based on
MAUVE (Pillutla et al., 2021), and citation precision and recall (Gao et al., 2023) for ASQA. 5
4.2 B ASELINES
Baselines without retrievals. We evaluate strong publicly available pre-trained LLMs,
Llama27B,13B (Touvron et al., 2023), instruction-tuned models, Alpaca7B,13B (Dubois et al., 2023)
(our replication based on Llama2); and models trained and reinforced using private data, Chat-
GPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) and Llama2-chat 13B. For instruction-tuned LMs, we use the official
system prompt or instruction format used during training if publicly available. We also compare our
method to concurrent work, CoVE65B (Dhuliawala et al., 2023), which introduces iterative prompt
engineering to improve the factuality of LLM generations.
Baselines with retrievals. We evaluate models augmented with retrieval at test time or during training.
The first category includes standard RAG baselines, where an LM (Llama2, Alpaca) generates output
given the query prepended with the top retrieved documents using the same retriever as in our system.
It also includes Llama2-FT, where Llama2 is fine-tuned on all training data we use without the
reflection tokens or retrieved passages. We also report the result of retrieval-augmented baselines
with LMs trained with private data: Ret-ChatGPT and Ret-Llama2-chat, which deploy the same
augmentation technique above, as well as perplexity.ai, an InstructGPT-based production search
system. The second category includes concurrent methods that are trained with retrieved text
passages, i.e., SAIL (Luo et al., 2023) to instruction-tune an LM on the Alpaca instruction-tuning
data with top retrieved documents inserted before instructions, and Toolformer (Schick et al., 2023)
to pre-train an LM with API calls (e.g., Wikipedia APIs).6
4.3 E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
Training data and settings. Our training data consists of diverse instruction-following input-output
pairs. In particular, we sample instances from Open-Instruct processed data (Wang et al., 2023) and
knowledge-intensive datasets (Petroni et al., 2021; Stelmakh et al., 2022; Mihaylov et al., 2018). In
total, we use 150k instruction-output pairs. We use Llama2 7B and 13B (Touvron et al., 2023) as
our generator base LM, and we use Llama2 7B as our base critic LM. For the retriever model R, we
use off-the-shelf Contriever-MS MARCO (Izacard et al., 2022a) by default and retrieve up to ten
documents for each input. More training details are in the Appendix Section B.1.
Inference settings. As a default configuration, we assign the weight terms ISREL , ISSUP , ISUSE
values of 1.0, 1.0 and 0.5, respectively. To encourage frequent retrieval, we set the retrieval threshold
to 0.2 for most tasks and to 0 for ALCE (Gao et al., 2023) due to citation requirements. We speed
up inference using vllm (Kwon et al., 2023). At each segment level, we adopt a beam width of 2.
For a token-level generation, we use greedy decoding. By default, we use the top five documents
from Contriever-MS MARCO (Izacard et al., 2022a); for biographies and open-domain QA, we
use additional top five documents retrieved by a web search engine, following Luo et al. (2023);
for ASQA, we use the author-provided top 5 documents by GTR-XXL (Ni et al., 2022) across all
baselines for a fair comparison.
5https://github.com/princeton-nlp/ALCE
6We report numbers using the results reported in the paper as the implementations are not available.
7

===== PAGE 8/30 =====
Preprint.
Table 2: Overall experiment results on six tasks. Bold numbers indicate the best performance among
non-proprietary models, and gray-colored bold text indicates the best proprietary model when
they outperforms all non-proprietary models. ∗ indicates concurrent or recent results reported by
concurrent work. – indicates numbers that are not reported by the original papers or are not applicable.
Models are sorted based on scale. FS, em, rg, mau, prec, rec denote FactScore (factuality); str-em,
rouge (correctness); MAUVE (fluency); citation precision and recall, respectively.
Short-form Closed-set Long-form generations (with citations)
PopQA TQA Pub ARC Bio ASQA
LM (acc) (acc) (acc) (acc) (FS) (em) (rg) (mau) (pre) (rec)
LMs with proprietary data
Llama2-c13B 20.0 59.3 49.4 38.4 55.9 22.4 29.6 28.6 – –
Ret-Llama2-c13B 51.8 59.8 52.1 37.9 79.9 32.8 34.8 43.8 19.8 36.1
ChatGPT 29.3 74.3 70.1 75.3 71.8 35.3 36.2 68.8 – –
Ret-ChatGPT 50.8 65.7 54.7 75.3 – 40.7 39.9 79.7 65.1 76.6
Perplexity.ai – – – – 71.2 – – – – –
Baselines without retrieval
Llama27B 14.7 30.5 34.2 21.8 44.5 7.9 15.3 19.0 – –
Alpaca7B 23.6 54.5 49.8 45.0 45.8 18.8 29.4 61.7 – –
Llama213B 14.7 38.5 29.4 29.4 53.4 7.2 12.4 16.0 – –
Alpaca13B 24.4 61.3 55.5 54.9 50.2 22.9 32.0 70.6 – –
CoVE65B * – – – – 71.2 – – – – –
Baselines with retrieval
Toolformer*6B – 48.8 – – – – – – – –
Llama27B 38.2 42.5 30.0 48.0 78.0 15.2 22.1 32.0 2.9 4.0
Alpaca7B 46.7 64.1 40.2 48.0 76.6 30.9 33.3 57.9 5.5 7.2
Llama2-FT7B 48.7 57.3 64.3 65.8 78.2 31.0 35.8 51.2 5.0 7.5
SAIL*7B – – 69.2 48.4 – – – – – –
Llama213B 45.7 47.0 30.2 26.0 77.5 16.3 20.5 24.7 2.3 3.6
Alpaca13B 46.1 66.9 51.1 57.6 77.7 34.8 36.7 56.6 2.0 3.8
Our SELF -RAG 7B 54.9 66.4 72.4 67.3 81.2 30.0 35.7 74.3 66.9 67.8
Our SELF -RAG 13B 55.8 69.3 74.5 73.1 80.2 31.7 37.0 71.6 70.3 71.3
5 R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS
5.1 M AIN RESULTS
Comparison against baselines without retrieval. Table 2 (top) presents the baselines without
retrieval. Our SELF -RAG (bottom two rows) demonstrates a substantial performance advantage
over supervised fine-tuned LLMs in all tasks and even outperforms ChatGPT in PubHealth, PopQA,
biography generations, and ASQA (Rouge and MAUVE). Our approach also significantly outperforms
a concurrent method that employs sophisticated prompt engineering; specifically, on the bio generation
task, our 7B and 13B models outperform the concurrent CoVE (Dhuliawala et al., 2023), which
iteratively prompts Llama265B to refine output.
Comparison against baselines with retrieval. As shown in Tables 2 (bottom), our SELF -RAG also
outperforms existing RAG in many tasks, obtaining the best performance among non-proprietary
LM-based models on all tasks. While our method outperforms other baselines, on PopQA or Bio,
powerful instruction-tuned LMs with retrieval (e.g., LLama2-chat, Alpaca) show large gains from
their non-retrieval baselines. However, we found that these baselines provide limited solutions for
tasks where we cannot simply copy or extract sub-strings of retrieved passages. On PubHealth
and ARC-Challenge, baselines with retrieval do not improve performance notably from their no-
retrieval counterparts. We also observe that most baselines with retrieval struggle to improve citation
accuracy. On ASQA, our model shows significantly higher citation precision and recall than all
models except ChatGPT. Gao et al. (2023) found that ChatGPT consistently exhibits superior efficacy
in this particular task, surpassing smaller LMs. Our SELF -RAG bridges this performance gap, even
outperforming ChatGPT in citation precision, which measures whether the model-generated claim is
fully supported by cited evidence. We also found that on the metrics for factual precision, SELF -RAG
7B occasionally outperforms our 13B due to the tendency of smaller SELF -RAG to often generate
8

===== PAGE 29/30 =====
Preprint.
Instructions
You will receive an instruction, evidence, and output, and optional preceding sentences. If the
preceding sentence is given, the output should be the sentence that follows those preceding
sentences. Your task is to evaluate if the output is fully supported by the information provided
in the evidence.
Use the following entailment scale to generate a score:
- [Fully supported] - All information in output is supported by the evidence, or extractions
from the evidence. This is only applicable when the output and part of the evidence are
almost identical.
- [Partially supported] - The output is supported by the evidence to some extent, but there
is major information in the output that is not discussed in the evidence. For example, if an
instruction asks about two concepts and the evidence only discusses either of them, it should
be considered a [Partially supported].
- [No support / Contradictory] - The output completely ignores evidence, is unrelated to the
evidence, or contradicts the evidence. This can also happen if the evidence is irrelevant to the
instruction.
Make sure to not use any external information/knowledge to judge whether the out-
put is true or not. Only check whether the output is supported by the evidence, and not
whether the output follows the instructions or not.
Instruction Explain the use of word embeddings in Natural Language Processing.
Preceding sentences Word embeddings are one of the most powerful tools available for
Natural Language Processing (NLP). They are mathematical representations of words or
phrases in a vector space, allowing similarities between words and the context in which they
are used to be measured.
Output Word embeddings are useful for tasks such as sentiment analysis, text classification,
predicting the next word in a sequence, and understanding synonyms and analogies.
Evidence Word embedding
Word embedding is the collective name for a set of language modeling and feature learning
techniques in natural language processing (NLP) where words or phrases from the vocabulary
are mapped to vectors of real numbers. Conceptually it involves a mathematical embedding
from a space with one dimension per word to a continuous vector space with a much lower
dimension. Methods to generate this mapping include neural networks, dimensionality
reduction on the word co-occurrence matrix, probabilistic models, explainable knowledge
base method, and explicit representation in terms of the context in which words appear. Word
and phrase embeddings, when used as the underlying input representation, have been shown
to boost the performance in NLP tasks such as syntactic parsing, sentiment analysis, next
token predictions as well and analogy detection.
Score [Fully supported]
Explanation The output sentence discusses the application of word embeddings, and the
evidence mentions all of the applications syntactic parsing, sentiment analysis, next token
predictions as well as analogy detection as the applications. Therefore, the score should be
[Fully supported].
Table 11: Instructions and demonstrations for ISSUP tokens.
29

===== PAGE 30/30 =====
Preprint.
Instructions
Given an instruction and an output, rate whether the response appears to be a helpful and
informative answer to the query, from 1 (lowest) - 5 (highest). We call this score perceived
utility. The detailed criterion is as follows: 5: The response provides a complete, highly
detailed, and informative response to the query, fully satisfying the information needs. 4: The
response mostly fulfills the need in the query, while there can be some minor improvements
such as discussing more detailed information, having better structure of the response, or im-
proving coherence. 3: The response is acceptable, but some major additions or improvements
are needed to satisfy users’ needs. 2: The response still addresses the main request, but it is
not complete or not relevant to the query. 1: The response is barely on-topic or completely
irrelevant.
Instruction Who is the current prime minister of the UK as of 2023?
Output Boris Johnson was the prime minister of the UK from 2019 - 2022.
Perceived utility 2
Explanation While the output provides a factually correct statement about the UK prime
minister from 2019 to 2022, this instruction asks who the prime minister is as of 2023, so it
doesn’t answer the instruction. Therefore, the utility is 2.
Instruction Given a description of a travel destination, recommend 10 tourist attrac-
tions with detailed descriptions of each. The travel destination is Tokyo, Japan.
Output Tokyo is a vibrant city full of exciting tourist attractions. Some must-see sights
include the Tokyo Skytree, Tokyo Disneyland, Sensoji Temple, Meiji Shrine, Tsukiji Fish
Market, Harajuku, and Shinjuku Gyoen.
Perceived utility 3
Explanation This output doesn’t provide descriptions of each attraction and the number of
the attractions is also less than 10. While this output partially answers the instructions, it
doesn’t match the instructions strictly.
Table 12: Instructions and demonstrations for ISUSE tokens.
30